

EIG-VBDA    SANHITA. 


FIEST    ASHTAKA. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA. 


ANFYAKA  I. 

SuKTA    I.  ManDALA    I. 

The  first  Sulda  or  Hymn  is  addressed  to  Agni.  The  Rishi  or 
author  is  Madhuchchhandas,  the  son  of  Viswamitea.  The 
metre  is  Gdyatr'i. 

1.  I  glorify  Agxi,''  the  high  priest  of  the  sacri-    Varga  i. 

"  A  great  variety  of  etymologies  are  devised  to  explain  the 
meaning  of  the  term  Agni,  the  most  of  which  are,  obviously,  fan- 
ciful, but  the  import  of  which  expresses  the  notions  entertained 
of  his  character  and  functions.  On  earth,  he  is  invoked  [niyate) 
the  first  {agra)  of  the  gods ;  in  heaven,  he  is  the  leader  (agran'i) 
of  the  hosts  of  the  gods ;  he  is  the  first  of  the  gods  (^2^rathamo 
devatdndm) ;  he  was  the  first-born  of  the  gods  {sa  vd  eshogre 
devatdnum  ajdijata).  In  these  derivations,  Agni  is  compounded, 
irregularly,  out  of  agra,  first,  and  7i'i,  to  lead.  It  is  also  derived 
from  anga,  body ;  because  he  off'ers  his  own  substance,  in  the  light- 
ing of  the  sacrificial  fire.  The  author  of  a  Niru/da,  or  glossary, 
called  Sthuldsht'hkin,  derives  it  from  the  root  hiu,  with  the  negative 
prefixed  (aJcnojpagati),  he  who  does  not  spare  the  fuel.  Another 
compiler  of  a  glossarj^,  S'dhqjkui,  derives  the  word  from  three 
roots,  i,  to  go,  anj,  to  anoint,  and  dah,  to  burn,  collectively ;  the 

5 


2  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA, 

fice,"  tlie  divine,"  the  ministrant,''  who  presents  the 
oblation  (to  the  gods),  and  is  the  possessor  of  great 
wealth.'^ 

2.  May  that  Agni,  who  is  to  be  celebrated  by 
both  ancient  and  modern  sages,''  conduct  the  gods 
hither. 

3.  Through  Agni  the   worshipper  obtains   that 


letters  being  arbitrari-Iy  changed  to  ag,  and  ni,  from  the  root  m, 
being  added.     See,  also,  YdsMs  JYiniJcta,  7,  14. 

*  Jl(/7ii  is  termed  the  Purohita,  the  priest  who  superintends 
family  rites,  or  because  he  is  one  of  the  sacred  fires  in  "which 
oblations  are  first  {puras)  offered  {hita). 

^  Beva,  which,  in  common  use,  means  a  god,  is  ordinarily  ex- 
plained, in  the  passages  in  which  it  occurs  in  the  Veda,  as  '  the 
bright,  shining,  radiant ; '  being  derived  from  div,  to  shine  :  or  it  is 
also  explained,  one  who  abides  in  the  sky  or  heaven  {dyusthdna). 
It  is,  here,  also  optionally  rendered,  liberal,  donor ;  the  sense  of 
giving  being  ascribed  to  the  same  radical. 

"  Ritivij,  a  ministering  priest,  or,  according  to  some,  the 
Ritivij^ho  is  also  the  Hotri, — the  term  that  follows  in  the  text, — 
the  priest  who  actually  presents  the  oblation,  or  who  invoices  or 
summons  the  deities  to  the  ceremony,  accordingly  as  the  word  is 
derived  from  hi,  to  sacrifice,  or  hvc,  to  call. 

^  The  word  is  ratnadJidtama,  lit.,  holder  of  jewels  :  but  ratna 
is  explained,  generally,  wealth,  and,  figuratively,  signifies  the 
reward  of  religious  rites. 

"  The  terms  purva  and  nutana,  former  and  recent,  applied  to 
Rishis,  or  sages,  are  worthy  of  remark,  as  intimating  the  existence 
of  earlier  teachers  and  older  hymns.  The  old  Risliis  are  said  to 
be  Bhrigu,  Angiras,  and  others ;  perhaps,  those  who  are  elsewhere 
termed  Prajdpatis. —  Vishnu  Purdna,  p.  49. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHTATA.  6 

affluence  Avliich  increases  day  by  day,  which  is  the 
source  of  fame,  and  the  multiplier  of  mankind. 

4.  Agni,  the  unobstructed  sacrifice''  of  which  thou 
art,  on  every  side,''  the  protector,  assuredly  reaches 
the  gods. 

5.  May  Agni,  the  presenter  of  oblations,  the 
attainer  of  knowledge,'  he  who  is  true,  renowned, 
and  divine,  come  hither,  with  the  gods. 

6.  Whatever  good  thou  may  est,    Agni,    bestow    Yargaii. 
upon    the    giver   (of  the   oblation),    that,    verily, 
Angiras,  shall  revert  to  thee."^ 

*  Adhivaram  yajnam.  The  first  is  usually  employed  as  a  sub- 
stantive, meaning,  also,  sacrifice  :  it  is  here  used  as  an  adjective, 
signifying  free  from  injury  or  interruption, — that  is,  hjRdhshasas, 
evil  spirits,  always  on  the  alert  to  vitiate  an  act  of  worship. 

'^  "  On  every  side"  alludes  to  the  fires  which,  at  a  sacrifice, 
should  be  lighted  at  the  four  cardinal  points,  east,  west,  south, 
and  north, — termed,  severally,  the  A'havami/a,  Mdrjdl'iya,  Gdrha- 
patya,  and  Agn'idhr'uja. 

Kavihratu  is  here  explained  to  signify  one  by  whom  either 
knowledge  or  religious  acts  {hratu)  have  been  acquired  or  per- 
formed (Jcrdnta).  The  compound  is  commonly  used  as  a  synonym 
of  Ag7n. 

'^  That  is,  the  wealth  bestowed  upon  the  Yajamdna — the  person 
by  whom,  or  on  whose  behalf,  the  sacrifice  is  performed, — will 
enable  him  to  multiply  his  oblations,  by  which  Agni,  again,  will 
benefit.  Instead  of  Agni  repeated,  we  have,  in  the  second  place, 
Angiras,  as  a  synonym,  which,  in  Manu  and  all  the  Purdnas^  is 
the  name  of  a  Rishi  or  Prajdpati,  one  of  the  primitive  mind-born 
sons  of  Brahma :  and  the  appellation  is  used,  frequently,  in  the 
text  of  the  Veda,  in  that  sense,  as  the  designation  of  a  Rishi 
the  founder  of  a  family,  or  of  a  school.    The  commentator  quotes 


4  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

7.  We  approach  thee,  Agni,  with  reverential 
homage  in  our  thoughts,  daily,  both  morning  and 
evening ; 

Ydsha,  for  the  identity  of  Angiras  with  Angara,  a  live  coal ;  and  a 
passage  from  the  Aitareya  Brdhmana  is  cited,  in  which  it  is  said, 
"the  coals  became  the  Angirasas "  {ye'ngdrd  dsanste' ngiraso 
^bhavan).  The  identification  of  Angiras  with  Agni,  in  function, 
though  not  in  person,  is  the  subject  of  a  legend,  told,  rather  con- 
fusedly and  obscurely,  in  the  Mahdhhdrata,  Vana-parva  (printed 
edition,  Vol.  i.,  p.  712),  by  MdrJcancleya  to  Yudhisht'hira,  in  reply 
to  his  question,  how  it  happened,  formerly,  that  Ag7ii,  having  gone 
to  the  forest,  and  his  functions  having  ceased,  Angiras  became 
Agni,  and  conveyed  the  oblations  to  the  gods.  Connected  with. 
this  question,  he  also  inquires,  how  it  is  that  Agni,  who  is  one, 
should  become  many.  MdrhanHeya  therefore  relates,  that  Agni, 
having  engaged  in  penance,  and  relinquishing  his  duties,  the 
Muni  Angiras  took  upon  him  his  office,  and,  when  he  prevailed 
upon  Agni  to  resume  it,  became  his  son  :  his  descendants,  the 
Angirasas,  are,  therefore,  also  the  descendants  of  Agni,  or  so  many 
Agnis,  or  fires.  Their  enumeration,  which  follows  at  some  length, 
shows  them  to  be,  for  the  most  part,  personifications  of  light,  of 
luminous  bodies,  of  divisions  of  time,  of  celestial  phenomena,  and 
fires  adapted  to  peculiar  occasions,  as  the  full  and  change  of  the 
moon,  or  to  particular  rites,  as  ih.Q  Aswamedha,  Rdjasuya,  the  Pdha- 
yajnas  (or  sacrifices  with  food),  obsequial  and  funeral  fires,  ex- 
piatory fires,  and  the  like.  The  legend  is,  possibly,  intended  to 
represent  the  organization  of  worship  with  fire, — which,  in  the  first 
instance,  was  of  a  primitive  and  simple  character, — and  its  appro- 
priation to  various  occasions,  by  Angiras  aud  his  disciples.  The 
Mahdhhdrata  is  not  contented  with  the  first  account,  but  gives  a 
second,  in  which  the  first  Agni  is  called  Salia ;  and  he  is  said  to 
have  hidden  himself  in  the  ocean,  to  avoid  the  approach  of  Niyata, 
the  son  of  Bharata,  the  fire  of  the  funeral-pile.     The  text  says, 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHTATA.  5 

8.  Thee,  the  radiant,  the  protector  of  sacrifices, 
the  constant  illuminator  of  truth,  increasing  in  thine 
own  dwelling.'' 

9.  Agxi,  be  unto  us  easy  of  access ;  as  is  a  father 
to  his  sou  :  be  ever  present  with  us,  for  our  good. 


SuKTA   II. 

The  Rislii  is  Madhtjchchhandas  ;  tlie  metre,  Gdyatr'i.  Of  the 
nine  stanzas  of  which  the  Hymn  consists,  three  are  addressed 
to  Vatu,  Wind;  three,  to  Indra  and  YATir,  conjointly;  and 
three,  to  Mitea  and  Vartjna. 

1.  Vayu,  pleasant  to  behold,''  approach.    These   v.ir-::  jit. 


"through  fear:"  the  commentary  says,  either  through  fear  of 
being  rendered  impure  by  his  contact,  or  being  ashamed  of  his 
relationship ;  Niyata  being  his  own  grandson.  The  gods  coming 
to  look  for  Agni,  he  designated,  as  his  substitute,  Atharvan,  also 
called  Angiras,  who,  for  a  time,  acted  as  Agni,  until  the  latter  was 
induced  to  resume  his  office.  The  legend  is  constructed,  as  the 
commentary  shows,  out  of  Vaidih  texts  :  but  the  details  are  clum- 
sily and  contradictorily  put  together ;  indicating,  perhaps,  their 
almost  obsolete  antiquity  at  the  time  of  the  compilation  of  the 
MahdlMrata. 

^  Swe  dame,  sua  domo,  the  chamber  in  which  fire-worship  is 
performed,  and  in  which  the  fire  increases  by  the  oblations  poured 
upon  it.     Da  ma,  for  a  home,  or  house,  is  peculiar  to  the  Vedas. 

^  Vdyu  is  invoked  in  a  visible  form,  as  the  deity  presiding  over 
the  wind.  It  is  doubtful  if  the  expressions  which,  in  this  and 
similar  instances,  intimate  personality  are  to  be  understood  as 
indicating  actual  figures  or  idols  :  the  personification  is,  probably, 
only  poetical. 


O  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

libations''  are  prepared  for  thee.     Drink  of  them  ; 
hear  our  innovation, 

2.  Vayu,  thy  praisers  praise  thee  with  holy- 
praises,"  having  poured  out  the  Soma  juice,  and 
knowing  the  (fit)  season. 

3.  Yatu,  thy  approving  speech'  comes  to  the 
giver  (of  the  libation),  and  to  many  (others  who 
invite  thee)  to  drink  of  the  Soma  juice. 

4.  Indra  and  Vayu,  these  libations  are  poured 
out  (for  you).  Come  hither,  with  food  (for  us). 
Verily,  the  drops  -(of  the  Soma  juice)  await  you 
both. 

5.  Indea  and  Vayu,  abiding  in  the  sacrificial  rite, 
you  are  aware  of  these  libations.  Come,  both,  (then,) 
quickly,  hither. 

Vargaiv.         6.  Vayu   and   Indea,    come   to   the  rite  of  t^e 


*  These  Somas  are  libations  of  the  juice  of  the  Soma,  plant,  the 
acid  Asclepias  or  Sarcostema  viminalis,  which  yields  to  expressure 
a  copious  milky  juice,  of  a  mild  nature  and  subacid  taste. — 
Roxlurgh,  ii.,  32.  According  to  Mr.  Stevenson,  it  is  not  used,  in 
sacrifices,  until  it  has  gone  through  the  process  of  fermentation, 
and  has  become  a  strong  spirituous  beverage. — Introduction  to 
Translation  of  the  Sdma-  Veda.  This  is  warranted  by  numerous 
expressions  in  the  following  hj'rans.  It  is,  evidently,  the  Horn  of 
the  Par  sees;  although  they  affirm,  that  the  plant  is  not  to  be  found 
in  India,  and  procure  it  from  the  mountains  of  Gilan  and  Ma- 
zenderan,  and  the  neighbourhood  of  Yezd. 

**  With  uldhas,  also  designated  sastras,  hymns  of  praise,  recited, 
not  chanted,  or  sung. 

Vayu  is  supposed  to  say,  I  will  drink  the  libation. 


FIRST  ASHTAKA FIRST   ADHTATA.  7 

sacrlficer ;  for  thus,  men/  will  completion  be  speedily 
(attained)  by  the  ceremony. 

7.  I  invoke  Mitra,"  of  pure  vigour,  and  Yaruna, 
the  devourer  of  foes, — the  joint  accomplishers  of  the 
act  bestowing  water  (on  the  earth).' 

8.  MiTRA  and  Yaruna,  augmenters  of  water, "^ 
dispensers  of  water,  you  connect  this  perfect  rite 
with  its  true  (reward). 

9.  Sapient  Mitra  and  Yaruna,  prosper  our  sa- 
crifice, and  increase  our  strength.  You  are  born  for 
the  benefit  of  many;  you  are  the  refuge  of  mul- 
titudes. 


^  Nard,  dual  of  nara,  a  man.  This  term  is  frequently  applied  to 
divine  beings :  it  is  usually  explained,  by  the  Scholiast,  netri, 
leader  or  guide  ;  but  it  may  be  doubted  if  it  does  not  convey  the 
sense  of  male  or  mortal,  alluding  to  the  limited  existence  of  the 
divinities.  In  this  place,  it  is  said  to  be  applicable  to  Vdyu  and 
Indra ;  because  they  are  possessed  of  manly  vigour  (^loaurusheria 
sdmarthyenopetau). 

*•  Mitra,  in  its  ordinary  sense,  is  a  name  of  the  sun ;  Varuna,  of 
the  regent  of  the  waters  :  but  they  are,  both,  included  among  the 
twelve  Adityas ;  and,  in  another  place,  Mitra  is  said  to  be  the  deity 
presiding  over  day ;    Varuna,  over  night :  see  p.  227,  note  b. 

"  Dhiyam  ghritdchhn  sddliantd.  The  two  first  words,  in  the 
senses  here  explained,  dh'i,  an  act,  and  gliritdch'i,  water-shedding, 
are  peculiar  to  the  Veda.  As  identified  with  the  sun,  or  as 
Adityas,  Mitra  and  Varuna  arc  said  to  cause  rain,  indirectly,  by 
producing  evaporation.  The  vapours  thus  raised,  becoming  con- 
densed in  the  atmosphere,  descend  again,  in  showers. 

*  Ritdvridhau.  Rita  usually  means  true  or  truth ;  but,  in  the 
Veda,  it  imports,  also,  water  and  sacrifice. 


RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 


SUKTA    III. 


The  Rishi  and  metre  are  the  same  as  in  the  two  preceding  Hymns. 
Of  twelve  stanzas,  three  are  addressed  to  the  AswiJfs ;  three,  to 
Indea  ;  three,  to  the  Yiswadevas  ;  and  three,  to  Sakaswati. 


Varga  V.         1.  Aswi]srs,''  clierishers  of  pious  acts,  long-armed," 
accept,  with  outstretched  hands,  the  sacrificial  viands. 

2.  AswiNS,  abounding  in  mighty  acts,  guides  (of 
devotion),  endowed  with  fortitude,  listen,  with  un- 
averted  minds,  to  our  praises. 

3.  Asw^iNS,  destroyers  of  foes,"  exempt  from  un- 
truth, leaders  in  the  van  of  heroes,'^  come  to  the 

°'  The  Aswins  are  the  two  sons  of  the  Sun, — begotten  during  his 
metamorphosis  as  a  horse  {aswa), — endowed  with  perpetual  youth 
and  beauty,  and  physicians  of  the  gods.  They  are  the  heroes  of 
many  legends  in  the  Purdiias,  but  of  still  more  in  this  Veda.  The 
enumeration  of  their  wonderful  actions  is  the  especial  subject  of 
Hymns  cxvi.  and  cxvii. 

^  Puruhhujd,  which  may  be  also  rendered,  great  eaters. 

'^  Basra,  destroyers,  either  of  foes  or  of  diseases.  The  medical 
character  of  the  Aswins  is  a  Vaidik  tradition,  as  in  a  text  quoted 
by  Sdyafia  (aswinau  vai  devdndm  Ikishajdviti  sruteh),  the  two 
Aswins,  verily,  are  the  physicians  of  the  gods. —  Veda. 

^  This  is  the  Scholiast's  interpretation  of  a  rather  curious  com- 
pound, .Rudravartan'i.  Rudra,  from  the  root  riid,  implies  weep- 
ing ;  as  say  the  Taittiriyas, — Inasmuch  as  he  wept,  thence  came 
the  property  or  function  of  rudra  {yad  arod'/t  fad  rudrasya  rud- 
ratwam).  This  is,  also,  the  Paurdiiik  etymology. —  Vishnu  Pur., 
p.  58.  The  Vdjasaney'is  make  the  verb  causal,  "they  cause  to  weep ;" 
therefore  they  are  rudras  {yad  rodayanti  tasmdd  rudrdh).  From 
these  texts  8dyana  renders  rudra,  heroes,  they  who  make  their 


FIEST   ASHTAKA FIEST  ADHYAYA.  9 

mixed  libations  sprinkled  on  the  lopped  sacred 
grass.^ 

4.  Indra,  of  wonderful  splendour,  come  hither. 
These  libations,  ever  pure,  expressed  by  the  fingers 
(of  the  priests),  are  desirous  of  thee. 

5.  Indea,  apprehended  by  the  understanding,  and 
appreciated  by  the  wise,  approach,  and  accept  the 
prayers  of  the  priest,  as  he  offers  the  libation. 

6.  Fleet  Indra,  with  the  tawny  coursers,  come 
hither  to  the  prayers  (of  the  priest),  and  in  this 
libation  accept  our  (proffered)  food. 

7.  Universal  Gods,''  protectors  and  supporters  of    vaiga  vi. 
men,   bestowers  (of  rewards),  come  to  the  libation 

of  the  worshipper. 

enemies  weep.  Vartani  means  a  road  or  way, — or  here,  it  is  said, 
the  front  of  the  way,  the  van ;  and  the  compound  means,  they 
who  are  in  the  van  of  warriors. 

'^  Vrihtaharhishah.  The  sacred  hisa  grass  {Poa  cynosuroides), 
after  having  had  the  roots  cut  oflP,  is  spread  on  the  vedi  or  altar ; 
and  upon  it  the  libation  of  Soma  juice,  or  oblation  of  clarified 
butter,  is  poured  out.  In  other  places,  a  tuft  of  it,  in  a  similar 
position,  is  supposed  to  form  a  fitting  seat  for  the  deity  or  deities 
invoked  to  the  sacrifice.  According  to  Mr.  Stevenson,  it  is  also 
strewn  over  the  floor  of  the  chamber  in  which  the  worship  is 
performed. 

^  The  Visivadevas  are,  sometimes,  vaguely  applied  to  divinities 
in  general ;  but  they  also  form  a  class,  whose  station  and  character 
are  imperfectly  noticed,  but  who  are  entitled,  at  most  religious 
rites,  to  share  in  the  solemnity.  In  this  and  the  two  nelxt  stanzas, 
forming  a  Tricha,  or  triad,  to  be  recited  at  the  worship  of  the 
Viswadevas,  some  of  their  attributes  are  particularized,  connecting 
them  with  the  elements. 


10  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

8.  May  the  swift-moving  universal  Gods,  the 
shedders  of  rain,  come  to  the  libation ;  as  the  solar 
rays  come,  diligently,  to  the  days. 

9.  May  the  universal  Gods,  who  are  exempt  from 
decay,  omniscient,^  devoid  of  malice,  and  bearers  (of 
riches),  accept  the  sacrifice. 

10.  May  Saeaswati,''  the  purifier,  the  bestower 
of  food,  the  recompenser  of  worship  with  wealth,  be 
attracted,  by  our  ofiered  viands,  to  our  rite. 

11.  Saraswati,  the  inspirer  of  those  who  delight 
in  truth,  the  instructress  of  the  right-minded,  has 
accepted  our  sacrifice. 

12.  Saeaswati'  makes  manifest,  by  her  acts,  a 
mighty  river,  and  (in  her  own  form,)  enlightens  all 
understandings. 

^  The  original  word  is  uncommon,  chimdydsah.  The  Scholiast 
explains  it  by  those  who  have  obtained  knowledge  universally 
(sarvafo  vydptaprajndh).  Or  it  may  refer,  Sdyana  states,  to  a 
legend,  in  which  the  Viswadevas  addressed  the  Agni  Sauch'ika, — 
who  had  gone  into  the  water, — saying,  chi,  come,  md  yds'ih,  do  not 
go  away;  from  whence  they  derived  the  appellation  eJiimdydsah. 
It  is  more  than  probable  that  the  origin  and  import  of  the  tenn 
were  forgotten  when  Sdyana  wrote. 

^  Sarasiuat'i  is,  here,  as  elsewhere,  the  Vdgdevaid,  divinitj^  of 
speech :  other  attributes  are  alluded  to  in  the  text ;  the  three 
stanzas  forming  a  tricha,  to  be  repeated  at  her  worship. 

"  Saraswati  is  here  identified  with  the  river  so  named. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHTAYA.  11 

ANUYAKA  II. 

Sl^KTA    I.    (IV.) 

The  Rishi  and  metre  continue  unchanged :  the  Hymn  is  addressed 

to  Indka. 

1.  Day  by  day  we  invoke  the  doer  of  good  works,   Varga  vii. 
for  our   protection ;    as  a  good  milcli-cow,  for  the 
milking,  (is  called  by  the  milker). 

2.  Drinker  of  the  Soma  juice,  come  to  our  (daily) 
rites,  and  drink  of  the  libation.  The  satisfaction  of 
(thee  who  art)  the  bestower  of  riches  is,  verily,  (the 
cause  of)  the  gift  of  cattle." 

3.  We  recognize  thee  in  the  midst  of  the  r-ight- 
minded,  who  are  nearest  to  thee.  Come  to  us  ;  pass 
us  not  b}^,  to  reveal  (thyself  to  others)." 

4.  Go,  worshipper,  to  the  wise  and  uninjured 
Indra, — wdio  bestows  the  best  (of  blessings)  on  thy 
friends, — and  ask  him  of  the  (fitness  of  the)  learned 
(priest  who  recites  his  praise).'' 

5.  Let   our   ministers,  earnestly  performing  his 

^  That  is,  if  Indra  be  satisfied,  he  will  augment  the  worship- 
per's herds.     The  notion  is  very  elliptically  expressed. 

''  Here,  again,  we  have  elliptical  phraseology.  The  original  is 
md  no  ati  Ichyah,  lit.,  do  not  speak  beyond  us  :  the  complete 
sense  is  supplied  by  the  Scholiast. 

'^  The  injunction  is  addressed  to  the  Yajamdna,  who  is  desired 
to  ask  if  the  Hotri,  or  invokcr  whom  he  employs,  is  fit  for  his 
duty.     The  Hotri  himself  is  supposed  to  enjoin  this. 


12  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

worship,  exclaim : ""  Depart,  ye  revilers,  from  hence 
and  every  other  place  (where  he  is  adored). 
Varga  VIII.  6.  Dcstroyor  of  foes,  let  our  enemies  say  we  ar§ 
prosperous ;  let  men  (congratulate  us).  May  we  ever 
ahide  in  the  felicity  (derived  from  the  favour)  of 
Indra. 

7.  Offer  to  Indea,  the  pervader  (of  every  rite  of 
libation),  the  juice  that  is  present  (at  the  three 
ceremonies),  the  grace  of  the  sacrifice,  the  exhila- 
rator  of  mankind,  the  perfecter  of  the  act,  the 
favourite  of  (that  Indea)  who  gives  happiness  (to 
the  offerer).'^ 

$.  Having  drunk,  S'atakeatu,'  of  this  [Soma 
juice),  thou  becamest  the  slayer  of  the  Yriteas  :  ^ 
thou  defendest  the  warrior  in  battle. 

^  The  Scholiast  would  explain  hruvantu,  "let  them  say,"  by  let 
them  praise  Indra  ;  but  this  does  not  seem  to  be  necessary.  The 
sense  is  connected  with  what  follows  :  let  them  say  procul  este, 
profani. 

**  These  epithets  of  the  Soma  juice  would  be  somewhat  unintel- 
ligible, without  the  aid  of  the  Scholiast.  The  perfecter  of  the  acts, 
karmdni  prdpnuvantam,  is  his  rendering  of  patayat,  causing  to 
fall ;  and  the  last  phrase,  mandatjatsalcham,  the  friend  of  the  de- 
lighter,  he  explains  as  in  the  text. 

"  S'atahratu,  a  name  of  Indra,  is  explained,  by  Sdyaiia,  he  who 
is  connected  with  a  hundred  (many)  acts,  religious  rites,  lahu- 
Icarmaijuhta,  either  as  their  performer,  or  their  object :  or  it  may 
be  rendered,  endowed  with  great  wisdom  ;  hratu  implying  either 
harma,  act,  or  prajnd,  knowledge.  In  the  first  sense,  the  word 
may  be  the  source  of  the  Paurdnik  fiction,  that  the  dignity  of 
Indra  is  attainable  by  a  hundred  Aswamedhas. 

'^   Vritrdndm,  of  the  enemies,  of  whom  the  Asura  Vritra  was  the 


FIRST   ASHTAKA FIRST   ADHYAYA.  13 

9.  We  offer  to  thee,  S'atakeatu,  the  mighty  in 
battle,  (sacrificial)  food,  for  the  acquirement,  Indra, 
of  riches. 

10.  Sing  unto  that  Indra,  who  is  the  protector  of 
wealth,  the  mighty,  the  accomplisher  of  good  deeds, 
the  friend  of  the  offerer  of  the  libation. 


SiJkta  II.  (Y.) 
The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  unchanged. 

1.  Hasten  hither,  friends,   offering  praises : '^    sit    Varga  ix. 
down,  and  sing,  repeatedly,  the  praises  of  Indra. 

2.  When  the  libation  is  poured  forth,  respectively 
praise  Indra,  the  discomfiter  of  many  enemies,  the 
lord  of  many  blessings. 

3.  May  he  be,  to  us,  for  the  attainment  of  our 
objects ;  may  he  be,  to  us,  for  the  acquirement  of 
riches ;  may  he  be,  to  us,  for  the  acquisition  of  know- 
ledge ;  may  he  come  to  us  with  food. 

4.  Sing  to  that  Indra,  whose  enemies,  in  combats, 
await  not  his  coursers  harnessed  in  his  car. 

5.  These  pure  Soma  juices,  mixed  with  curds,  are 


head,  according  to  the  Scholiast.     "We  shall  hear  more  of  Trifra 
hereafter. 

^  Stomavuhasah,  lit.,  bearing  praises.  Eosen  translates  it  sacra 
ferentes;  M.  Langlois,  vous  qui  avcz  un  trcsor  d^hy nines  [sacres). 
Say  ana  explains  the  expression,  "presenting,  in  this  rite,  Trirrit, 
Panchadasa,  and  others,"  that  is,  collections  of  laudatory  stanzas 
in  the  Rig-Veda,  so  denominated. —  Vishiiu Furuna,  p.  42, 


14  E,IG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

poured  out  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  drinker  of  the 
libations. 
Varga  X.  6.  Thou,  Indea,  performer  of  good  works,  hast 
suddenly  become  of  augmented  vigour,  for  the  sake 
of  drinking  the  libation,  and  (maintaining)  seniority* 
(among  the  gods). 

7.  Indea,  who  art  the  object  of  praises,  may 
these  pervading  Soma  juices  enter  into  thee :  may 
th©y  be  propitious  for  thy  (attainment  of)  superior 
intelligence. 

8.  The  chants  (of  the  Sdmay  have  magnified 
thee,  S'ataeeatu  ;  the  hymns  (of  the  JRich)  have 
magnified  thee  :  may  our  praises  magnify  thee. 

9.  May  Indea,  the  unobstructed  protector,  enjoy 
these  manifold  (sacrificial)  viands,  in  which  all  manly 
properties  abide. 

10.  Indea,  who  art  the  object  of  praises,  let  not 
men  do  injury  to  our  persons.  Thou  art  mighty : 
keep  off  violence. 

*  Ji/ai'sht'hi/am,  abstract  oijyaishiha,  elder,  oldest  j  but  it  may, 
also,  mean  best  or  cbiefest. 

^  The  Scholiast  supplies  these  particulars,  the  terms  of  the 
text  being  simply  stomdh  and  nhthd :  the  former,  he  says,  are  the 
praises  of  the  singers  of  the  Suma  {Sdinagdhdm  stoirdiii) ;  the 
latter,  the  hymns  of  the  reciters  of  the  Bahvrich  {Bahvrichdndm 
sastrdni).  But,  of  this  and  other  passages  where  Sdyaiia  inserts 
the  designation  of  other  Veclas, — the  Sdma  and  the  Yajusli, — it 
is  to  be  observed,  that  the  accuracy  of  his  additions  involves  the 
prior  existence  of  those  Veclas,  at  least  to  the  hymns  of  the  Rich 
in  which  they  are  supposed  to  be  alluded  to ;  a  conclusion  which 
there  is  reason  to  hesitate  admitting. 


riEST   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHTATA.  15 


SUKTA  III.    (VI.) 

The  Rishi  and  metre  continued.  The  three  first  stanzas  and 
the  last  are  addressed  to  Indea  ;  the  rest,  to  the  Makuts,  or 
"Winds,  with,  or  without,  Indea. 

1.  The  circumstationed  (inhabitants  ef  the  three    Varga  xi. 
worlds)'*  associate  with  (Indea),  the  mighty  (Sun), 

the  indestructive  (fire),  the  moving  (wind),  and  the 
lights  that  shine  in  the  sky.^ 

2.  They  (the  charioteers,)  harness  to  his  car  his 


"■  The  text  has  only  pari  tastlmshali,  those  who  are  standing 
around.  The  loliatrayavartinah  prdninah,  the  living  beings  of 
the  three  worlds,  is  the  explanation  of  the  Scholiast. 

^  Of  the  three  first  objects  the  text  gives  only  the  epithets 
Iradhna,  the  mighty,  to  which  Sdijana  adds  Aditya,  the  Sun ; 
arusha,  the  non-injuring,  to  which  Fire  is  supplied ;  and  charat 
the  moving,  an  epithet  of  Wind.  The  last  phrase  is  complete, — 
rocJmnte  rocliand  divi.  Sdyaiia's  additions  are  supported  by  a 
Brdhmana,  which  explains  the  epithets  as  equivalent,  severally,  to 
Aditya,  Ayni,  and  Vdyti  [Asau  vd,  Adityo  hradlinah;'''"'  Agnir  vd 
arushah  r"'''  Vdyurvai  cJiaran) :  we  may,  therefore,  admit  it.  The 
identification  of  Indra  with  the  tliree  implies,  the  Scholiast  says, 
his  supremacy ; — he  is  paramaisioaryayulda :  but  the  text  says 
they  join  (yu/ijanti) ;  and  it  does  not  appear,  exactly,  whom;  for 
Indra  is  not  named.  As  the  following  stanzas  show,  however, 
that  the  hymn  is  addressed  to  Indra,  he  may  be  allowed  to  keep 
his  place  as  essentially  one  with  the  sun,  fire,  wind,  and  the 
constellations. 


16  RIG-YEDA   SANHITA. 

two  desirable  coursers,''  placed  on  either  hand,^  bay- 
coloured,  high.- spirited,  chief-bearing.'' 

3.  Mortals,  you  owe  your  (daily)  birth  (to  such 
an  Indea),  who,  with  the  rays  of  the  morning,  gives 
sense  to  the  senseless,  and,  to  the  formless,  form.*^ 

4.  Thereafter,  verily,  those  who  bear  names  in- 
voked in  holy  rites,  (the  MartjTs),''  having  seen  the 
rain  about  to  be  engendered),  instigated  him  to 
resume  his  embryo  condition  (in  the  clouds). 

5.  Associated  with  the  conveying  Maruts,  the 
traversers  of  places  difficult  of  access,  thou,  Indea, 
hast  discovered  the  cows  hidden  in  the  cave/ 

"■  The  horses  of  Indra  are  named  har'i,  usually  considered  as 
denoting  their  colour,  green  or  yellow,  or,  as  Eosen  has  it,  flavi. 
In  this  same  verse,  we  have  them,  presently,  described  as  soiia, 
crimson,  bright  bay,  or  chestnut. 

^  Vipakshasd,  harnessed  on  different  sides, — Say  ana  says,  of 
the  chariot ;  we  should  say,  of  the  pole.  But  the  Hindu  ratha 
may  not  have  had  a  pole. 

*=  Literally,  men-bearing, — nrivdhasd. 

^  Indra  is  here,  again,  identified  with  the  sun,  whose  morning 
rays  may  be  said  to  reanimate  those  who  have  been  dead,  in  sleep, 
through  the  night.  There  is  some  difficulty  in  the  construction : 
for  marydli,  mortals,  is  plural,  while  ajdyathdh  is  the  second 
person  singular  of  the  first  preterite.  Sdyana  is  of  opinion  that 
the  want  of  concord  is  a  Vaidih  license,  and  that  the  plural  sub- 
stantive marydli  has  been  put  for  the  singular  maryah. 

®  The  Maruts  are  not  named  in  the  text ;  but  the  allusions 
justify  the  commentator's  specification  :  the  winds  drive  Indra,  or 
the  firmament,  into  an  aggregation  of  clouds,  in  which  the  rain 
again  collects,  as  in  their  womb. 

^  Allusion  is  here  made  to  a  legend,  which  is  frequently  ad- 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  ii 

6.  The  reciters    of    praises   praise   the   mighty    VargaXii. 
(troop  of  Maruts),  who  are  celebrated,  and  con- 
scious of  the  power  of  bestowing  wealth,  in  like 
manner  as  they  (glorify)  the  counsellor,  (Indra). 

7.  May  you  be  seen,  Maruts,  accompanied  by 
the  undaunted  Indra;''  (both,)  rejoicing,  and  of 
equal  splendour. 

8.  This  rite  is  performed  in  adoration  of  the 
powerful  Indra,  along  with  the  irreproachable, 
heavenward-tending,  and  amiable  bands  (of  the 
Maruts). 

9.  Therefore,  circumambient  (troop  of  Maruts), 
come  hither,  whether  from  the  region  of  the  sky, 
or  from  the  solar  sphere;^  for,  in  this  rite,  (the 
priest)  fully  recites  your  praises. 

10.  We  invoke  Indra, — whether  he  come  from 

verted  to,  of  the  Asuras  named  Panis  having  stolen  the  cows  of 
the  gods,  or,  according  to  some  versions,  of  the  Angirasas,  and 
hidden  them  in  a  cave,  where  they  were  discovered  by  Indra, 
with  the  help  of  the  bitch  Saramd.  A  dialogue  between  her  and 
the  robbers  is  given,  in  another  place,  in  which  she  conciliates 
them.  In  other  passages,  the  cows  are  represented  as  forcibly 
recovered  by  Indra,  with  the  help  of  the  Maruts. 

^  Allusion,  it  is  said,  is  here  made  to  a  battle  between  Indra 
and  Vritra.  The  gods  who  had  come  to  the  aid  of  the  former 
were  driven  away  by  Vritra' s  dogs  ;  and  Indra,  to  obtain  the  su- 
periority, summoned  the  Maruts  to  his  assistance. 

**  The  region  of  the  winds  is,  properly,  the  dyidolca,  the  heaven, 
or  region  above  the  antarihsha,  or  sky.  Or  they  may  come  from 
a  sphere  of  light  further  above,  or  the  solar  region,  udityaman- 
daldt. 

6 


18  IlIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

this  earthly  region,  or  from  the  heaven  above,  or 
from  the  vast  firmament,'' — that  he  may  give  (us) 
wealth. 

SUKTA  IV.  (VII.) 
The  deity  is  Indea  ;  the  Rishi  and  metre,  as  before. 

Varga  XIII.  ] .  The  chantors  (of  the  Sdma)  extol  Indea  with 
songs ;  the  reciters  of  the  Mich,  with  prayers ;  (the 
priests  of  the  Yajush\  with  texts.'' 

*  Either  the  prithiviloha  or  the  dyuloka.  The  text  adds  maho 
rajasah,  which  the  Scholiast  explains  the  great  antarilcshaloka, 
the  sphere  of  the  firmament,  which  is,  properly,  the  space  between 
the  earth  and  heaven,  corresponding  with  vyoman  or  dicdsa,  the 
sky  or  atmosphere. — Mann,  I.,  13. 

^  The  Scholiast  supplies  the  specification  of  the  several  Vedas. 
The  first  term,  gdthinah,  merely  means  singers,  although  he  ren- 
ders it  giyamdnasdmayuhta  udgdtdrah,  "  the  tidgdtris,  with  Sdmas 
to  be  chanted ;"  an  interpretation,  he  thinks,  confirmed  by  the  next 
term,  (songs),  hrihat,  for  Irihatd,  '*  with  the  Brihat  Sdma."  The 
next  phrase,  arhehhir  arhinah,  is  more  akin  to  Rich,  "Those  of  the 
Rig-veda,  with  stanzas  : "  but  it  is  not  necessarily  confined  to  that 
sense ;  and,  as  arha  is  a  synonym  of  mantra,  a  prayer,  the  sense 
may  be,  those  who  pray,  or  praise,  Indra  with  prayers.  For  the 
Adhwaryus,  or  priests  of  the  Yajiish,  we  have  nothing  at  all  in  the 
original ;  and  the  term  vdn'ih,  for  vdri'ibhih,  "with  texts  or  words," 
which  occurs,  apparently  without  any  grammatical  connexion,  may 
be  referred  either  to  the  singers,  or  the  reciters,  of  the  prayers.  It 
is  applied,  by  the  Scholiast,  to  the  texts  of  the  Yajush, — apparently, 
only  because  he  had  connected  the  preceding  expressions  with 
the  other  two  Vedas.  As  already  remarked,  any  reference  to  the 
Yajush,  or  Sdnia,  in  a  verse  of  the  Rich,  implies  the  priority  of 
the  two  former  to  the  latter. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHTAYA.  19 

2.  Indra,  the  blender  of  all  things,  comes,  verily, 
with  his  steeds  that  are  harnessed  at  his  word, — 
Indra,  the  richly-decorated,''  the  wielder  of  the 
thunderbolt. 

3.  Indra,  to  render  all  things  visible,  elevated 
the  sun  in  the  sky,^  and  charged  the  cloud  with 
(abundant)  waters. 

4.  Invincible  Indra,  protect  us,  in  battles  abound- 
ing in  spoil,  with  insuperable  defences. 

5.  "We  invoke  Indra  for  great  affluence ;  Indra, 
for  limited  wealth, — (our)  ally,  and  wielder  of  the 
thunderbolt  against  (our)  enemies. 

6.  Shedder  of  rain,  grantor  of  all  desires,  set  open    Varga  xiv. 
this  cloud.     Thou  art  never  uncompliant  with  our 
(requests). 

7.  Whatever  excellent  praises  are  given  to  other 
divinities,  they  are  (also,  the  due)  of  Indra,  the 
thunderer.    I  do  not  know  his  fitting  praise. 

8.  The  shedder  of  rain,  the  mighty  lord,  the 
always  compliant,  invests  men  with  his  strength ;  as 
a  bull  (defends)  a  herd  of  kine. 

9.  Indra,  who  alone  rules  over  men,  over  riches, 

*  So  the  Scholiast  explains  the  term  of  the  text,  hiranijaya; 
literally,  golden,  or  made  of  gold. 

''  The  world  being  enveloped  in  darkness  by  Vritm,  Indra,  in 
order  to  remove  it,  elevated  (a  rohayat,  or  as  the  comment  says, 
sthdpitavdn,  placed,)  the  sun  in  the  dyuloha,  or  heaven.  The 
latter  part  of  the  passage  may  also  be  rendered,  he  (the  sun)  ani- 
mated the  mountain  («.  e.,  the  world,)  with  his  rays. 


20  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

and   over  the   five   (classes)    of    the   dwellers    on 
earth.* 

10.  We  invoke,  for  you,  Indra,  who  is  every- 
where among  men.   May  he  be  exclusively  our  own. 


ANFVAKA  III. 

SUKTA    I.    (VIII.) 

The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  as  before. 

Varga  XV.  1.  Indra,  bring,  for  our  protection,  riches,  most 
abundant,  enjoyable,  the  source  of  victory,  the 
humbler  of  our  foes ; 

2.  By  which  we  may  repel  our  enemies,  whether 
(encountering  them)  hand  to  hand,''  or  on  horse- 
back ;*"  ever  protected  by  thee. 

3.  Defended  by  thee,  Indra,  we  possess  a  pon- 
derous weapon,  wherewith  we  may  entirely  conquer 
our  opponents. 

4.  With  thee  for  our  ally,  Indra,  and  (aided  by) 

"  The  text  has,  over  the  five  men,  or  classes  of  men,  pancha 
hshitmdm.  The  latter  term  is  explained  etymologically,  those  vs^ho 
are  fit  for  habitations  {nivdsdrhdndm).  The  phrase  is  of  not  unfre- 
quent  recurrence,  and  is  usually  said  to  imply  the  four  castes, 
Brdhmanas,  Kshattriyas,  Vaisyas,  and  Sudras,  and  Nishddas, — 
barbarians,  or  those  who  have  no  caste ;  intending,  possibly,  the 
aboriginal  races  of  India,  all  in  a  very  low  stage  of  civilization, 
like  the  Gonds,  Koles,  and  Bhils  of  the  present  day. 

^  Literally,  by  striking  with  the  fist,  mtisld'ihatyayd. 

'^  "  With  a  horse."  The  Scholiast  explains  this  and  the  pre- 
ceding to  intend  infantry  and  cavalry. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST  ADHYAYA.  21 

missile-hurling  heroes,  we  are  able  to  overcome  (our 
foes)  arrayed  in  hosts. 

5.  Mighty  is  Indra,  and  supreme.  May  magni- 
tude ever  (belong)  to  the  bearer  of  the  thunderbolt ; 
may  his  strong  (armies)  be,  ever,  vast  as  the  heavens. 

6.  Whatever  men  have   recourse  to  Indra, — in    Varga  xvi. 
battle,  or  for  the  acquirement  of  offspring, — and  the 

wise  who  are  desirous  of  understanding,  (obtain  their 
desires). 

7.  The  belly  of  Indra,  which  quaffs  the  Soma 
juice  abundantly,  swells,  like  the  ocean,  (and  is  ever) 
moist,  like  the  ample  fluids  of  the  palate.* 

8.  Verily,  the  words  of  Indra  to  his  worshipper 
are  true,  manifold,  cow-conferring,  and  to  be  held 
in  honour :  (they  are)  like  a  branch  (loaded  with) 
ripe  (fruit). 

9.  Verily,  Indra,  thy  glories  are,  at  all  times,  the 
protectors  of  every  such  worshipper  as  I  am. 

10.  Verily,  his  chanted  and  recited  praises*"  are 
to  be  desired  and  repeated  to  Indra,  that  he  may 
drink  the  Soma  juice. 

*  The  Scholiast  expounds  the  text,  urv'ir  dpo  na  kdkudah,  as  ren- 
dered above.  But  kdkiida  may  refer  to  kakud,  the  pinnacle  of  a 
mountain;  and  the  phrase  might,  then,  be  translated,  like  the 
abundant  waters  (or  torrents)  from  the  mountain-tops. 

^  The  first  is  the  translation  of  stoma,  which  the  commentary 
defines  sdmasddhyam  sfofram,  praise  to  be  accomplished  by  the 
Sdma-Veda :  the  second  is  the  rendering  of  uktha,  which  the 
same  authority  describes  as  the  Riksddhjam  sastram,  the  unsung 
praise  to  be  accomplished  by  the  Rich.     S'astram  is  explained,  by 


22  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

SUKTA    II.    (IX.) 

Divinity,  RisM,  and  metre,  the  same. 

Varo-axvii.  ^'  Come,  Indra,  and  be  regaled  with  all  viands 
and  libations,  and,  thence,  mighty  in  strength,  be 
victorious  (over  thy  foes). 

2.  The  libation  being  prepared,  present  the  ex- 
hilarating and  efficacious  (draught)  to  the  rejoicing 
Indea,  the  accomplisher  of  all  things. 

3.  Indra  with  the  handsome  chin,^  be  pleased 
with  these  animating  praises :  do  thou,  who  art  to 
be  reverenced  by  all  mankind,^  (comp)  to  these 
rites,  (with  the  gods). 

Sndhara  Swdmi,  in  the  scholia  on  the  Bhdgavata  Purdna,  to  sig- 
nify a  sacred  hymn  not  sung,  sastram  aprag'itamantrastotram,  the 
repetition  of  which  is  the  office  of  the  Hotri,  hotiih-lcarma ;  while 
stuti  and  stoma  imply  the  sung  or  chanted  hymn,  sang'itam  sto- 
tram.  M.  Burnouf  renders  sastm,  les  prieres  \jne7dales\  qui  sont 
comme  le  glaive;  and,  in  a  note  in  the  VisMii  Purdna,  I  have  trans- 
lated the  same  expression  of  the  Bhdgavata,  the  unuttered  incan- 
tation (p.  42,  n.).  But  it  may  be  doubted  if  this  is  quite  correct. 
The  difference  between  sastra  and  stoma  seems  to  be,  that  one  is 
recited,  whether  audibly  or  inaudibly ;  the  other,  sung. 

"  Siisipra.  But  sipra  means  either  the  lower  jaw,  or  the  nose ; 
and  the  compound  may  equally  denote  the  handsome-nosed. 

''  The  epithet  vikvacharsham  is,  literally,  "  0  thou  who  art 
all  men,"  or,  as  Sdyana  explains  it,  sarvamanushyayulcta,  who 
art  joined  with  all  men,  which  he  qualifies  as  sarvair  yajamdnaih 
pujyah,  to  be  worshipped  by  all  institutors  of  sacrifices.  It  may 
be  doubted  if  this  be  all  that  is  intended.  Bosen  renders  it  om- 
nium hominum  domine :  M.  Langlois  has  maitre  souverain. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  23 

4.  I  have  addressed  to  thee,  Indra,  the  showerer 
(of  blessings),  the  protector  (of  thy  worshippers), 
praises  which  have  reached  thee,^  and  of  which  thou 
hast  approved. 

5.  Place  before  us,  Indra,  precious  and  multi- 
form riches ;  for  enough,  and  more  than  enough,  are, 
assuredly,  thine. 

6.  Opulent  Indra,  encourage  U3  in  this  rite  forvargaxviil. 
the  acquirement  of  wealth  ;  for  we  are  diligent  and 
renowned. 

7.  Grant  us,  Indra,  wealth  beyond  measure  or 
calculation,  inexhaustible,  the  source  of  cattle,  of 
food,  of  all  life. 

8.  Indra,  grant  us  great  renown,  and  wealth  ac- 
quired in  a  thousand  ways,  and  those  (articles)  of 
food  (which  are  brought  from  the  field,)  in  carts.^ 

9.  We  invoke,  for  the  preservation  of  our  pro- 
perty, Indra,  the  lord  of  wealth,  the  object  of 
sacred  verses,  the  repairer  (to  the  place  of  sacrifice), "^ 
praising  him  with  our  praises. 

10.  "With  libations  repeatedly  effused,  the  sacri- 

*  The  Scholiast  makes  this,  "reached  thee  in  heaven,"  oxswarga. 
It  may  be  questioned  if  the  Veda  recognizes  swarga  as  the  heaven 
of  Indra.  ' 

^  The  original  of  this  hymn,  as  of  many  others,  is  so  concise 
and  elliptical  as  to  be  unintelligible,  without  the  liberal  amplifi- 
cation of  the  Scholiast.  We  have,  in  the  text,  simply  "  those  car- 
having  viands,"  ta  rathinir  ishah,  meaning.  Say  ana  says,  those 
articles  of  food  which  are  conveyed  in  cars,  carts,  or  waggons,  from 
the  site  of  their  production ;  as  rice,  barley,  and  other  kinds  of  grain. 

'^  Here,  again,  wc  have  only  f/antdram,  he  who  goes,  that  is 


24  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

ficer  glorifies  the  vast  prowess  of  Indea,  the  mighty, 
the  dweller  in  (an  eternal  mansion).* 

SUKTA    III.    (X.) 

The  divinity  and  Rishi  are  the  same ;  the  metre  is  the  common 
AnusMulh. 

Varga  XIX.  1-  ^ho  chanters  (of  the  Sdma)  hymn  thee,  S'a- 
TAKRATU ;  the  reciters  of  the  Richas  praise  thee,  who 
art  worthy  of  praise ;  the  Brdhmanas  ^  raise  thee 
aloft,  like  a  bamboo-pole. 

according  to  the  comment,  he  who  is  accustomed  to  go  to  the 
chamber  which  is  appropriated  to  sacrifices,  ydgadese  gamanas'ilam. 

*  The  epithet  is  nyohas,  from  ni,  explained  niyata,  fixed,  per- 
manent, and  ohas,  dwelling. 

*  This  stanza  is  nearly  similar  to  the  first  stanza  of  the  seventh 
hymn  (see  p.  18),  and  is  similarly  expounded  by  the  commentator. 
The  first  term,  gdyatriiia,  literally,  those  who  employ  the  Gdyatr'i 
metre,  is  said,  by  Sdyana,  to  denote  the  Udgdtri,  the  chanter  of  the 
hymns  of  the  Sdma:  arhiriah  is  explained,  as  before,  the  reciters  of 
the  Rich,  and  the  same  as  the  Hotri  of  a  sacrifice.  The  third  term, 
trakmdmJi,  is  explained  the  Brahma  of  a  sacrifice,  or  priest  so 
denominated,  and  the  other  Brdhmanas.  The  objection  to  the  ex- 
planation of  the  first,  as  involving  the  prior  recognition  of  the 
Sdma-veda,  has  been  already  noticed.  The  total  disconnection  of 
the  term  hrahmdnah,  the  plural  of  brahman,  from  any  refer- 
ence to  Brdhmanas,  as  bearing  a  share  in  religious  rites,  and  as 
implying  only  hetenden,  utterers  of  prayer,  as  proposed  by 
Dr.  Roth  {Zeitschrift  der  Beutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft, 
Vol.  I.,  p.  66),  cannot  be  admitted  without  further  investigation; 
although  it  may  be  possible  that  the  Brahma  of  a  sacrifice  does 
not  necessarily  involve  the  notion  of  a  Brdhmana  by  caste.  Eosen 
renders  the  word,  Brahmani;  M.  Langlois,  j9re^/-es.  The  concluding 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHTAYA.  25 

2.  Indra,  the  showerer  (of  blessings),  knows  the 
object  (of  his  worshipper),  who  has  performed  many 
acts  of  worship  (with  the  Soma  plant,  gathered)  on 
the  ridges  of  the  mountain,^  and  (therefore,)  comes 
with  the  troop  (of  Maruts). 

3.  Indra,  drinker  of  the  Soma^  having  put  to  thy 
long-maned,  vigorous,  and  well- conditioned  steeds,^ 
come  nigh,  to  hear  our  praises. 

4.  Come,  Vasu,°  (to  this  our  rite) :  reply  to  our 

phrase,  two,  *%id  vansam  ivayemire,  "they  have  raised  thee, like  a 
bamboo,"  is  rather  obscure.  The  Scholiast  says,  they  have  elevated 
Indra,  as  tumblers  raise  a  bamboo-pole,  on  the  summit  of  which 
they  balance  themselves ;  a  not  uncommon  feat  in  India :  or,  as 
vansa  means,  also,  a  family,  it  may  be  rendered,  as  ambitious  per- 
sons raise  their  family  to  consequence.  Roth's  proposed  rendering, 
Lie Betenden  schiitteln  dichauf,  *  *  wie  man  ein  Rohr  schiiUelt,  "the 
praying  agitate  thee  up,  as  one  shakes  a  reed,"  has  no  warrant, 
except  from  his  theory  of  the  purport  of  Brahma,  "  irresistible 
prayer;"  as  ud  yam  never  means  to  shake,  and  a  bamboo  is  not  a 
reed,  nor  is  it,  when  substantial,  easily  shaken.  Rosen  has,  it  is 
true,  te,  *  anmdinis  instar  erigunt :  but  he  had  no  preferable  equi- 
valent for  bamboo.  M.  Langlois  has  comme  on  eleve  la  hampe  d''un 
drapeau.  Sdyana,  no  doubt,  knew  much  better  than  either  of 
the  European  interpreters,  what  the  expression  intended. 

*  The  original  has  only,  mounting  from  ridge  to  ridge,  yat 
sdnoh  sdnum  dniJiat,  which  the  Scholiast  completes  by  observing 
that  this  is  said  of  the  Yajamdna,  who  goes  to  the  mountain  to 
gather  either  the  Soma  plant  for  bruising,  or  fuel  for  the  fire,  or 
other  articles  required  for  the  cei'emony. 

^  Kakshyaprd,  lit.,  filling  out  their  girths. 

°  Vasu,  here  used  as  a  synonym  of  Indra,  is  explained  as  the 
original  donor  or  cause  of  habitations,  from  the  radical  vas,  to 
dwell,  n  wdsakdraii  abhii  ta. 


26  RXG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

hymns,  answer  (to  our  praises),  respond  to  (our 
prayers) :  be  propitious,  Indea,  to  our  sacrifice,  and 
(bestow  upon  us  abundant)  food. 

5.  The  hymn,  the  cause  of  increase,  is  to  be  re- 
peated to  Indea,  the  repeller  of  many  foes;  that 
S'akea^  may  speak  (with  kindness,)  to  our  sons  and 
to  our  friends. 

6.  We  have  recourse  to  Indea,  for  his  friendship, 
for  wealth,  for  perfect  might ;  for  he,  the  powerful 
Indea,  conferring  wealth,  is  able  (to  protect  us). 

Varga  XX.  "^ '  I^DEA,  by  thee  is  food  (rendered),  everywhere, 
abundant,  easy  of  attainment,  and  assuredly  perfect. 
Wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  set  open  the  cow-pas- 
tures,^ and  provide  (ample)  wealth. 

8.  Heaven  and  earth  are  unable  to  sustain  thee, 
when  destroying  thine  enemies.  Thou  maj'-est  com- 
mand the  waters  of  heaven.    Send  us,  liberally,  kine. 

9.  0  thou  whose  ears  hear  all  things,  listen, 
quickly,  to  my  invocation ;  hold,  in  thy  heart,  my 

,      praises ;  keep  near  to  thee  this  my  hymn,  as  it  were 
(the  words  of)  a  friend. 

10.  We  know  thee,  liberal  rainer  (of  blessings), 
the  hearer  of  our  call  in  battles:  we  invoke  the 
thousand-fold  profitable  protection  of  thee,  the 
showerer  (of  bounties). 

*  S'aJcra  is  a  common  synonym  of  Indra,  but  is  used,  if  not  in 
this,  clearly  in  the  next,  stanza,  as  an  epithet,  implying  'the 
powerful,*  from  sah.,  to  bo  able. 

*•  The  text  is  literally  rendered ;  the  meaning  being,  that  Indra, 
as  the  sender  of  rain,  should  fertilize  the  fields,  and,  by  providing 
abundant  pasturage,  enable  the  cattle  to  yield  store  of  milk. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  27 

11.  Come  quickly,  Indra,  son  of  Kusika:''  de- 
lighted, drink  the  libation:  prolong  the  life  that 
merits  commendation  :  make  me,  who  am  a  IlisM, 
abundantly  endowed  (with  possessions). 

12.  May  these  our  praises  be,  on  all  occasions, 
around  thee,  deserver  of  praise  ;  may  they  augment 
the  power  of  thee,  who  art  long-lived ;  and,  being 
agreeable  to  thee,  may  they  yield  delight  (to  us). 

SUKTA  IV.  (XI.) 

The  divinity  is,  still,  Indka  ;  but  the  Rishi  is  now  styled  Jetki, 
the  son  of  Madhuchchhaxdas  :  the  metre  is  Anusht'ubh. 

1.  All  our  praises  magnify  Indra,  expansive  as    Varga  xxi. 
the  ocean,  ^  the  most  valiant  of  warriors  who  fight 

in  chariots,  the  lord  of  food,  the  protector  of  the 
virtuous. 

2.  Supported  by  thy  friendship,  Indra,  cherisher 
of  strength,  we  have  no  fear,  but  glorify  thee,  the 
conqueror,  the  unconquered. 

3.  The  ancient  liberalities  of  Indra,  his  protec- 

*  In  all  the  Paurdiiih  genealogies,  the  son  oiKusilca  is  the  sage 
Vtswdmitra  ;  and,  in  order  to  explain  its  application  to  Indra, 
Sdyana  quotes  the  legend  given  in  the  Index  {Anukramanikd), 
which  states  that  Kusika,  the  son  of  IsMratha,  being  desirous  of  a 
son  equal  to  Inira,  adopted  a  life  of  continence,  in  requital  of 
which,  Indra  was  born  as  the  son  of  Gdth'i,  the  GddU  of  the 
Purdnas. 

"  Samudravyachasam,  explained  samudravad  vydptavantam, 
.spreading  or  pervading  like  the  ocean;  a  vague  mode  of  indi- 
cating the  universal  diffusion  of  Indra  as  the  firmament. 


28  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

tions,  will  not  be  wanting  to  him  who  presents,  to 
the  reciters  of  the  hymns,  wealth  of  food  and  cattle. 

4.  Indra  was  born  the  destroyer  of  cities,  '^  ever- 
young,  ever-wise,  of  unbounded  strength,  the  sus- 
tainer  of  all  pious  acts,  the  wielder  of  the  thunder- 
bolt, the  many-praised. 

5.  Thou,  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  didst  open 
the  cave  of  Bala,^  who  had  there  concealed  the 
cattle;  and  the  gods  whom  he  had  oppressed  no 
longer  feared,  when  they  had  obtained  thee  (for 
their  ally). 

6.  (Attracted)  by  thy  bounties,  I  again  come, 
hero,  to  thee,  celebrating  (thy  liberality),  while 
offering  this  libation.  The  performers  of  the  rite 
approach  thee,  who  art  worthy  of  praise;  for  they 
have  known  thy  (munificence). 

7.  Thou  slowest,  Indka,  by  stratagems,  the  wily 

*  The  text  has  only  pur  dm  hhinduh,  breaker  of  cities :  the 
Scholiast  adds  asurdndm,  of  the  Asuras. 

^  Bala,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  was  auAsura,  who  stole  the 
cows  of  the  gods,  and  hid  them  in  a  cave :  Indra  surrounded  the 
cave,  with  his  army,  and  recovered  the  cattle.  In  the  legend,  as 
cited  from  the  Anuhramanilcd,  theFanis, — formerly  noticed  as  the 
cow-stealers  (p.  16,  n.  f.), — are  said  to  be  the  soldiers  of  Bala, 
and  the  actual  thieves  and  concealers  of  them  in  the  cave.  Rosen 
conceives  some  relation  to  exist  between  this  legend  and  that  of 
Cacus:  Quas  fahdas  aliquo  coijyiationis  vmculo  inter  se  contineri,  et 
ex  uno  eodemque  fonte,  quantumvis  remoto,  derivatas  esse,  persuasum 
quidem  est  mild. — Adnotationes,  p.  xxi.  But  the  story  is  likely  to 
have  originated  in  incidents  common  to  an  early  and,  partly,  pas- 
toral stage  of  society.  We  have  the  Cacus  of  the  Highlands,  and 
the  Bala  of  the  Veda,  in  such  worthies  as  Donald  Ben  Lean. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  29 

S'usHNA :  '^  the  wise  have  known  of  this  thy  (great- 
ness).    Bestow  upon  them  (abundant)  food. 

8.  The  reciters  of  sacred  hymns  praise,  with  all 
their  might,  Indra,  the  ruler  of  the  world,  whose 
bounties  are  (computed  by)  thousands,  or  even 
more. 

ANUVAKA    IV. 

SUKTA    I.     (XII.) 

The  deity  addressed  is  Agni  ;  the  Eishi  is  Medhatithi,  the  son 
of  Kanwa  ;  the  metre,  Gdyatri. 

1.  "We  select  Agni,  the  messenger  of  the  gods,''  Varga  xxii. 
their  invoker,  the  possessor  of  all  riches,  the  per- 

fecter  of  this  rite. 

2.  (The  offerers  of  oblations)  invoke,  with  their 
invocations,  Agni,  Agni,  the  lord  of  men,°  the 
bearer  of  offerings,  the  beloved  of  many. 

3.  Agni,  generated*^  (by  attrition),  bring  hither 

*  S'ushiia  is  described  as  an  Asura  slain  by  Indra  :  but  this  is, 
evidently,  a  metaphorical  murder.  S'ushiia  means  drier  up,  ex- 
siccator :  hhufdnam  soshanahetu,  the  cause  of  the  diying  or 
withering  of  beings,  heat  or  drought, — which  Indra,  as  the  rain, 
would  put  an  end  to. 

^  The  commentator  cites  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  in  confirm- 
ation of  this  function  ;  Usanas,  the  son  of  Kari,  being  the  mes- 
senger of  the  Asuras.  Agnir  devdndm  data  ds'id  ;  Usanali  hdvyo 
^surdndm. 

"^  Vispati ;  Vis  being  constantly  used  for  prajd,  progeny, 
people,  men. 

^  The  original  has  only  jajndnah,  'being  born,'  that  is,  being 


30  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

the  gods  to  the  clipped  sacred  grass.    Thou  art  their 
invoker  for  us,  and  art  to  be  adored. 

4.  As  thou  dischargest  the  duty  of  messenger, 
arouse  them,  desirous  of  the  oblation :  sit  down,  with 
them,  on  the  sacred  grass. 

5.  Eesplendent  Agni,  invoked  by  oblations  of 
clarified  butter,  consume  our  adversaries,  who  are 
defended  by  evil  spirits.* 

J  6.  Agni,  the  ever-young  and  wise,  the  guardian 
'  of  the  dwelling^  (of  the  sacrificer),  the  bearer  of 
offerings,  whose  mouth  is  (the  vehicle)  of  oblations, 
is  kindled  by  Agni.*" 
Varga  XXIII.  7.  Praisc,  in  the  sacrifice,  Agni,  the  wise,  the 
observer  of  truth,  the  radiant,  the  remover  of 
disease. 

8.  Eesplendent  Agni,  be  the  protector  of  that 
offerer  of  oblations  who  worships  thee,  the  messenger 
of  the  gods. 

9.  Be  propitious,  Pavaka,^  to  him  who,  present- 
artificially  produced  by  the  friction  of  two  pieces  of  a  particular 
species  of  wood,  that  of  the  Premna  spinosa,  used  for  the  purpose. 

^  Rahshaswinah,  having  or  being  attended  by  Rdkshasas. 

*  Grihapati.  But  pati  is  most  usually  interpreted,  by  Sdyana, 
pdlaJca,  the  cherisher  or  protector.  Hence  it  here  characterizes 
Agni  as  the  protector  of  the  house  of  the  Yajamdna. 

•^  That  is,  the  Ahavaniya  fire,  into  which  the  oblation  is  poured, 
is  lighted  by  the  application  of  other  fire,  whether  taken  from  the 
household  fire,  or  produced  by  attrition. 

^  A  name  of  fire,  or  a  fire;    literally,  the  purifier. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  31 

ing  oblations  for  the  gratification  of  the  gods,  ap- 
proaches Agni.'' 

10.  Agni,  the  bright,  the  purifier,  bring  hither 
the  gods  to  our  sacrifice,  to  our  oblations. 

11.  Praised  with  our  newest  hymn,  bestow  upon 
us  riches  and  food,  the  source  of  progeny. 

12.  Agni,  shining  with  pure  radiance,  and  charged 
with  all  the  invocations  of  the  gods,  be  pleased  by 
this  our  praise. 

Si5kta  II.  (XIII). 

Tlie  Rishi  and  the  metre  are  the  same ;  but  the  Hymn  is  addressed, 
to  a  variety  of  divinities,  or  deified  objects,  to  which  the  general 
name  Apei  is  applied.  The  first  five  stanzas  hymn  various 
forms  of  Agni  ;  the  sixth,  the  doors  of  the  hall  of  sacrifice ; 
the  seventh,  morning  and  night ;  the  eighth,  two  divine  or 
deified  priests ;  the  ninth,  the  goddesses  Ila,  SAKASWAif,  and 
Bhakati  ;  the  tenth,  Twashtri  ;  the  eleventh,  Vanaspati  ; 
and  the  twelfth,  Savaha.  They  are,  all,  considered  as  identifi- 
able or  connected  with  Agni,^ 

1.  Agni,  who  art  Susamiddha,''  invoker,  purifier,  vargaxxiv. 
bring  hither  the  gods  to  the  offerers  of  our  oblation ; 

and  do  thou  sacrifice. 

2.  Wise  (Agni),  who  art  Tantjnapat,^  present, 

*  This  verse  is  to  be  repeated,  when  the  worshipper  approaches 
the  combined  Ahavaniya  and  Gdrhapatya  fires,  to  offer  the  oblation. 

^  The  Apns  are,  usually,  enumerated  as  twelve,  but,  sometimes, 
—omitting  one  of  the  names  of  fire,  Nardsansa, — only  eleven. 

"  Sii,  well,  sam,  completely,  and  iddha,  kindled;  'the  thoroughly 
kindled.' 

?  Tanunapdt,  the  devourer  of  clarified  butter  {taniinapa);  or,  ac- 
cording to  another  etymology,  the  consumer  of  its  own  substance 


32  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

this  day,  our  well-flavoured  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  for 
their  food. 

3.  I  invoke  the  beloved  Naeasansa,*  the  sweet- 
toDgued,  the  offerer  of  oblations,  to  this  sacrifice. 

4.  Agni,  (who  art)  Ilita,^  bring  hither  the  gods, 
in  an  easy-moving  chariot ;  for  thou  art  the  invoker 
instituted  by  men. 

5.  Strew,  learned  priests,  the  sacred  grass,**  well 
bound  together  (in  bundles),  and  sprinkled  with 
clarified  butter,  the  semblance  of  ambrosia. 

6.  Let  the  bright  doors, "^  the  augmenters  of  sacri- 
fice, (hitherto)  unentered,  be  set  open ;  for,  certainly, 
to-day  is  the  sacrifice  to  be  made. 

Varga  XXV.       7.  I  iuvoke  the  lovely   night  and  dawn^  to  sit 
upon  the  sacred  grass,  at  this  our  sacrifice. 

{tanu)  or  fuel.  Napdt  occurs,  in  the  Nighanfn,  as  a  synonym  of 
ianaya,  son  or  offspring ;  but,  in  this  compound,  the  second  member 
is  considered  to  be  either  ad,  who  eats,  or^a,  who  preserves, — the 
latter,  with  na  prefixed,  napdt,  who  does  not  preserve,  who  destroys. 

^  Narasanm,  him  whom  men  {nardh)  praise  (sansanti). 

^  riita,  the  worshipped ;  from  il,  to  adore,  to  praise. 

•^  Barkis  is  said,  here,  to  be  an  appellative  also  of  Apii.  The 
double  meaning  pervades  the  concluding  phrase,  wherein  (in  which 
grass,  or  in  which  Agni,)  is  the  appearance  of  ambrosia,  amrita- 
darsanam ;  amrita  implying  either  the  clarified  butter  sprinkled 
on  the  grass,  or  the  immortal  Agni.  Amritasamdnasya  ghritasya, 
or  maranaraliitasaya  *  harhirndmahasydgneh. 

^  The  doors  of  the  chamber  in  which  the  oblation  is  offered ; 
said  to  be  personifications  of  Ag^ii :  Agniviseshamiirtayah. 

^  According  to  the  ordinary  import  of  nahta  and  tishas.  But 
they,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  denote,  in  this  place,  two  forms  of 
fire,  presiding  over  those  seasons,— tatkdldbhimdnivahmmuriidtvaye. 


FIRST   ASHTAEA — FIRST   ADHTAYA.  33 

8.  I  call  the  two  eloquent,  divine,  and  sage  in- 
vokers''  (of  the  gods),  that  they  may  celebrate  this 
our  sacrifice. 

9.  May  the  three  undecaying  goddesses,  givers  of 
delight,  Ila,  Saraswati,  and  Mahi,''  sit  down  upon 
the  sacred  grass. 

10.  I  invoke  the  chief  and  multiform  Twashtri:*' 
may  he  be,  solely,  ours. 

11.  Present,  divine  Yanaspati,*^  our  oblation  to 

^  The  construction  shows  that  we  have  two  persons,  or  divini- 
ties, here ;  the  Scholiast  says,  two  Agnis.  The  Index  has  daivyau 
hotdrau  prachetasau,  two  divine  invokers  {pracJietasas) :  or  the 
latter  word  may  mean,  merely,  sages,  like  the  hav'i  of  the  text. 

^  Mahi  is  said  to  be  a  synonym  of  Bhdrat'i,  as  appears  from  an 
analogous  passage,  where  the  names  occur  lid,  Saraswat'i,  Bhdrati. 
These  are,  also,  designated,  by  the  Scholiast,  as  personifications  of 
Agni,  Valinimurtayah  :  they  are,  also,  called  the  three  personified 
flames  of  fire.  As  goddesses,  the  first,  lid,  is  the  earth,  the  bride 
of  Vishnu ;  Saraswat'i  is,  as  usual,  the  goddess  of  eloquence,  and 
wife  of  Brahmd :  the  third,  synonymous  with  speech,  is  called  the 
wife  of  Bharata,  one  of  the  Adltyas  :  but  these  mythological  per- 
sonifications are  of  a  post-  Vaidik  period. 

"  TwasMri,  in  the  popular  system,  is  identified  with  Viswaharma, 
the  artificer  of  the  gods ;  and  he  seems  to  possess  some  attributes 
of  that  nature  in  the  Vedas,  being  called  the  fabricator  of  the 
original  sacrificial  vase  or  ladle.  A  text  of  the  Veda  is,  also,  quoted, 
which  attributes  to  him  the  formation  of  the  forms  of  animals  in 
pairs:  Twasht'd  vai pasundm  mtthundtidm  rupahrid iti sruteh.  He 
is,  also,  one  of  the  twelve  Adityas,  and  here  is  said  to  be  an  Agni : 
TwasMrindmakam  agnim. 

*  Vanaspati,  lord  of  the  woods ;  usually,  a  large  tree ;  here, 
said  to  be  an  Agni, — as  if  the  fuel  and  the  burning  of  it  were 
identified. 

7 


34  B.IG-YEDA    SANHITA. 

the  gods ;  and  may  true  knowledge  be  (the  reward) 
of  the  giver. 

12.  Perform  the  sacrifice  conveyed  through 
Swaha'*  to  Indra,  in  the  house  of  the  worshipper. 
Therefore  I  call  the  gods  hither. 

SUKTA  III.  (XIV.) 
The  Rishi  and  metre  are  iinchaDged ;  but  the  Hymn  is  addressed  to 

the  YlsWADETAS. 

Varga  XXVI.  1.  Como,  Agni,  to  our  adoration,  and  to  our 
praises,  with  all  these  gods,  to  drink  the  Soma  juice  ; 
and  (do  thou)  offer  sacrifice. 

2.  The  Kan  WAS  ^  invoke  thee,  sapient  Agni,  and 
extol  thy  deeds.     Come,  Agni,  with  the  gods. 

3.  Sacrifice,  (Agni),  to  Indra,  Yayu,  Brihaspati, 
MiTRA,  Agni,  Pushan,  and  Bhaga,  the  Adittas,  and 
the  troop  of  Maruts.'' 

*  Swdhdy  as  the  exclamation  used  in  pouring  the  oblation  on 
the  fire,  may,  also,  be  identified  with  Agni.  In  the  section  on  the 
various  Agnis,  in  the  Mahdhhdrata,  Swdhd  is  called  the  daughter  of 
Brihaspati,  the  son  of  Angiras.  The  Purdrias  give  her  a  different 
origin,  and  make  her  the  daughter  of  Daksha,  and  wife  of  Agni. 

^  The  Kaiiwas  properly  denote  the  descendants,  or  the  disciples, 
of  the  Rishi  Kanwa ;  but  the  Scholiast  would  restrict  the  term,  in 
this  place,  to  the  sense  of  sages  {medhdvinah),  or  of  officiating 
priests  iritwijah). 

"  "Sacrifice,  Agni,  to,"  are  supplied  by  the  commentary;  for 
the  verse  contains  only  the  proper  names  in  the  objective  case. 
Most  of  these  have  already  occurred.  Mitra,  Piishan,  and  Bhaga 
are  forms  of  the  Sun,  or  Adityas,  specified  individually,  as  well  as 
the  class  of  Adityas,  or  Suns,  in  the  twelve  months  of  the  year. 
Why  jyihaspaii  or  Brihaspati  should  be  inserted  is  not  explained  : 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST  ADHTAYA.  35 

4.  For  all  of  you  are  poured  out  these  juices, 
satisfying,  exhilarating,  sweet,  falling  in  drops,  or 
gathered  in  ladles. 

5.  The  wise  priests,  desirous  of  the  protection  (of 
the  gods),  having  spread  the  sacred  grass,  present- 
ing oblations,  and  offering  ornaments,  praise  thee. 

6.  Let  the  coursers  who  convey  thee,  glossy- 
backed,''  and  harnessed  at  will,  bring  the  gods  to 
drink  the  Soma  juice. 

7.  Agni,  make  those  objects  of  veneration,  aug-  Vargaxxvii. 
mentors  of  pious  acts,  (participant  of  the  offering), 
together   with   their   wives  :^  give    them,    bright- 
tongued,  to  drink  of  the  Soma  juice. 

8.  Let  those  objects  of  veneration  and  of  praise 
drink,  with  thy  tongue,  of  the  Soma  juice,  at  the 
moment  of  libation. 

9.  Let  the  wise  invoker  (of  the  gods)  bring  hither, 
from  the  shining  (sphere)  of  the  sun,"  all  the  divini- 
ties, awaking  with  the  dawn. 

10.  "With  all  the  gods,  with  Indra,  Vayu,  and 

the  etymology  of  the  name  is  given  from  Pdnmi  (VI.,  I.,  157) ; 
hrilias,  for  brihat,  great,  divine,  a  deity  ;  and  pati,  master,  or 
protector,  in  his  character  of  spiritual  preceptor  of  the  gods. 

*  Ghritaprishthcih  ;  their  backs  shining  with,  or  from,  ghee,  or 
clarified  butter :  the  commentary  says,  with  which  the  horses  are 
fed. 

''  Patnivatah,  having  their  wives. 

"  Lit.,  from  the  shining  of  the  Sun  {Siiryasya  rochanut) ;  equi- 
valent, the  Scholiast  says,  to  SwargaloJcdt :  but  Sioarga  and  the 
Adityaloha  are,  usually,  regarded  as  very  different.  Perhaps  the 
reading  should  be  Swarloldt,  from  the  region  of  heaven. 


XXVIII. 


36  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

the  glories  of  Mitra,^  drink,  Agni,  the  sweet  Soma 
juice. 

11.  Thou,  Agni,  appointed,  by  man,  as  the  in- 
voker  (of  the  gods),  art  present  at  sacrifices.  Do 
thou  present  this  our  oblation. 

12.  Yoke,  divine  Agni,  thy  fleet  and  powerful 
mares,  Eohits,^  to  thy  chariot ;  and,  by  them,  hither 
bring  the  gods. 

SUKTA    IV.    (XV.) 

The  Rishi  and  metre  are  unchanged ;  the  deity  is  Rittj,''  associated, 
in  each  stanza,  with  some  divinity  more  familiarly  known. 

1.  Indra,  drink,  with  Ritu,  the  Soma  juice.  Let 
the  satisfying  drops  enter  into  thee,  and  there 
abide. 

2.  Maruts,  drink,  with  Ritu,  from  the  sacrificial 
vase  :  consecrate  the  rite  ;  for  you  are  bountiful. 

3.  Neshtri,''  with  thy  spouse,  commend  our  sa- 
crifice to  the  gods :  drink,  with  Ritu  ;  for  thou  art 
possessed  of  riches. 

"  Mitrasya  dJidmabhih,  with  the  rays;  or,  according  to  the 
commentator,  with  various  forms  of  Mitra. 

^  Tdhhih,  with  them,  in  the  feminine  gender ;  and,  hence,  the 
Scholiast  adds  laUavdhhih,  mares.  They  are  termed  Rohits,  which 
may  mean  red.  The  Nighaniu  defines  the  term  as  the  name  of 
the  horses  of  Agni. 

*  "  Ritu  is,  properly,  a  season,  a  sixth  of  the  Hindu  year,  but  is, 
here,  personified  as  a  divinity. 

^  NesMri  is  another  name  of  Ttvnsht'ri,  from  his  having  assumed, 
it  is  said,  upon  some  occasion,  the  function  of  the  Neshtri,  or  priest 
80  denominated,  at  a  sacrifice. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  37 

4.  Agni,  bring  the  gods  hither ;  arrange  them  in 
three  places ;  ^  decorate  them  :  drink  with  Ritu. 

5.  Drink  the  Soma  juice,  Indra,  from  the  pre- 
cious vase  of  the  Brdhmana^^  after  Ritu,  for  whom 
thy  friendship  is  uninterrupted. 

6.  Mitra  and  Yaruna,  propitious  to  pious  acts, 
be  present,  with  Ritu,  at  our  sacrifice,  efficacious, 
and  undisturbed  (by  foes). 

7.  (The  priests,)  desirous  of  wealth,  holding  stones'"  y^rga  xxix. 
in  their  hands,  praise  the  divine  (Agni,)  Dra vino- 
das,*^  both  in  the  primary  and  subsidiary  sacrifices.^ 

*  Either  at  the  three  daily  ceremonies, — at  dawn,  midday,  and 
sunset, — or  in  the  three  fires  lighted  at  sacrifices,  the  Ahavaniya, 
Ldkshina,  and  Gdrhapatya. 

^  The  text  is  obscure.  Brdhmandd  rddliasah  is,  literally,  from 
Brahmanical  wealth  :  but  the  latter  is  explained,  a  costly  or 
wealthy  vessel, — dhanahhiitdt  pdtrdt ;  and  the  former,  relating  to 
the  Brdhmandchchhansi, — Brdhmandchchhansisamhaddhdt.  The 
Brdhmandchchhans't  is  one  of  the  sixteen  priests  employed  in 
sacrifices ;  corresponding,  in  the  second  division  of  four,  to  the 
Brahma  in  the  first :  and,  perhaps,  his  function  may  be  to  hold 
some  ladle,  or  vase,  in  which  the  ofiering  is  presented,  or  in  which 
the  portion  not  expended  is  removed;  as  it  is  said  of  him,  "  the 
relation  is  the  ladle  that  has  the  leavings," — tasj/a  samha7idhyuch- 
chhist'as  chamasah.  Eosen  renders  it,  sacro  prcecepto  congrua  ex 
patera;  M.  Langlois,  au  vase  qui  contient  Voffrande  sainte. 

"  Grdvahastdsah,  having  stones  in  their  hands,  with  which  to 
bruise  the  Soma  plant.  The  Grdvastut  is,  also,  one  of  the  six- 
teen priests ;  but  it  is,  here,  used  generally. 

*  Dravinodas  is  either  an  epithet  or  an  appellative  of  Jgni,  as 
the  donor  [das)  of  wealth,  or  of  strength,  draviiia. 

*  In  the  adhwara  and  in  the  yajnas,  the  first  is  said  to  be  the 


38  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

8.  May  Dravinodas  give  us  riches  that  may  be 
heard  of.     We  ask  them  for  the  gods. 

9.  Dravinodas  desires  to  drink,  with  the  Ritus, 
from  the  cup  of  Neshtri.  ^  Hasten,  (priests,  to  the 
hall  of  offering) ;  present  the  oblation,  and  depart. 

10.  Since,  Dravinodas,  we  adore  thee,  for  the 
fourth  time,^  along  with  the  Ritus,  therefore  be  a 
benefactor  unto  us. 

11.  AswiNS,  performers  of  pious  acts,  bright  with 
sacrificial  fires,  accepters,  with  the  Ritus,  of  the 
sacrifice,  drink  the  sweet  draught. 

12.  Giver  of  rewards,''  (Agni),  being  identified 
with  the  household  fire,  and  partaker,  with  Rixu,  of 
the  sacrifice,  worship  the  gods,  on  behalf  of  their 
adorer. 

SiJkta  V.  (XVI.) 
The  Rishi  and  metre  continued  :  the  deity  is  Indka.  ' 

Varga  XXX.  1.  Indra,  let  thy  coursers  hither  bring  thee, 
bestower  of  desires,  to  drink  the  Soma  juice :  may 
(the  priests),  radiant  as  the  sun,  (make  thee  mani- 
fest). 

primary  or  essential  ceremony,  prakritirupa,  such  as  the  Agnish- 
t'oma ;  the  second,  the  modified  ceremonies,  vikritiriipa ;  such 
as  the  Zfkthja,  which  is,  elsewhere,  termed  an  offering  with  Soma 
juice, — Somasansthaydga. 

^  Or  from  the  cup  of  the  NesMri,  one  of  the  sixteen  officiating 
priests. 

''  That  is,  Dravinodas  has  been  now  celebrated  in  four  stanzas. 

*  The  name,  in  the  text,  is  Santya,  which  is  so  explained,  by 
the  Scholiast,  from  san,  to  give. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  39 

2.  Let  his  coursers  convey  Indra,  in  an  easy- 
moving  chariot,  hither,  where  these  grains  (of 
parched  barley),  steeped  in  clarified  butter,  are 
strewn  (upon  the  altar). 

3.  We  invoke  Indra,  at  the  morning  rite;  we 
invoke  him,  at  the  succeeding  sacrifice ;  we  invoke 
Indra  to  drink  the  Soma  juice.'' 

4.  Come,  Indra,  to  our  libation,  with  thy  long- 
maned  steeds.  The  libation  being  poured  out,  we 
invoke  thee. 

5.  Do  thou  accept  this  our  praise,  and  come  to 
this  our  sacrifice,  for  which  the  libation  is  prepared : 
drink,  like  a  thirsty  stag.*" 

6.  These  dripping  So7na  juices  are  effused  upon  Vargaxxxi. 
the  sacred  grass.    Drink  them,  Indra,  (to  recruit 

thy)  vigour. 

7.  May  this  our  excellent  hymn,  touching  thy 
heart,  be  grateful  to  thee;  and,  thence,  drink  the 
effused  libation. 

8.  Indra,  the  destroyer  of  enemies,  repairs,  as- 
suredly, to  every  ceremony  where  the  libation  is 
poured  out,  to  drink  the  Soma  juice,  for  (his)  ex- 
hilaration. 

9.  Do  thou,  S'atakratu,  accomplish  our  desire, 
with  (the  gift  of)  cattle  and  horses.  Profoundly 
meditating,  we  praise  thee. 


*  Although  not  more  particularly   named,    the   specification 
implies  the  morning,  midday,  and  evening  worship. 
••  Like  the  gaura,  said  to  be  a  sort  of  deer. 


40  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

SUKTA    VI.    (XVII.) 

Metre   and   Rishi,    as  before ;    divinities,  Indea.   and  Vaeui^a, 
conjointly. 

Varga XXXII.  1.  I  Seek  the  protection  of  the  sovereign  rulers,* 
Indea  and  Yaruna.  May  they,  both,  favour  us  ac- 
cordingly ; 

2.  For  you  are  ever  ready,  guardians  of  mankind, 
to  grant  protection,  on  the  appeal  of  a  minister  such 
as  I  am. 

3.  Satisfy  us  with  wealth,  Indra  and  Yaruna, 
according  to  our  desires.  We  desire  you  ever  near 
us. 

4.  The  mingled  (libations)  of  our  pious  rites,  the 
mingled  (laudations)  of  our  right-minded  (priests, 
are  prepared).  May  we  be  (included)  among  the 
givers  of  food.^ 

*  Samrdjoh,  of  the  two  emperors;  but  rdjd  is,  in  general, 
equivocally  used, — meaning,  shining,  bright,  as  well  as  royal; 
so  that  Sdyana  explains  the  term,  "possessed  of  extensive 
dominion,"  or  "  shining  very  brilliantly."  Indra  may  claim  the 
title  of  rdjd,  as  chief  of  the  gods ;  but  it  seems  to  be,  in  a  more 
especial  manner,  appropriated  to  Varuiia. 

^  The  stanza  is  rather  elliptically  and  obscurely  worded ;  and 
the  sense  of  the  leading  term,  yuvdhu,  is  not  very  clear :  it  usually 
denotes  a  mixture  of  curds  and  ghee.  We  have,  in  the  text, 
yuvdhu  *  sach'mdm  ;  yuvdhu  siimat'indm.  The  former  {sacldndni)  is 
explained,  a  mixture  of  buttermilk,  water,  and  meal,  suited  for 
acts  of  religious  worship ;  the  latter,  the  combination  of  choice 
expressions  and  praises  which  are  the  suitable  phraseology  of  the 
right-minded  or  pious  {sumatindm).  The  final  clause  is,  simply, 
may  we  be  of  (amongst)  the  givers  of  food. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  41 

5.  Indra  is  a  giver  among  the  givers  of  thou- 
sands :  Yaruna  is  to  be  praised  among  those  who 
are  deserving  of  laudation. 

6.  Through  their  protection  we  enjoy   (riches),      Var?a 
and  heap  them  up ;  and,  still,  there  is  abundance. 

7.  I  invoke  you  both,  Indra  and  Varuna,  for 
manifold  opulence.  Make  us  victorious  (over  our 
enemies). 

8.  Indra  and  Yarijna,  quickly  bestow  happiness 
upon  us ;  for  our  minds  are  devoted  to  you  both. 

9.  May  the  earnest  praise  which  I  offer  to  Indra 
and  Yaruna  reach  you  both, — that  conjoint  praise 
which  you  (accepting,)  dignify. 

ANUVAKA  Y. 

SUKTA    I.    (XVIII.) 

The  metre  and  Rishi  as  in  the  preceding.  The  first  five  stanzas 
are  addressed  to  Brahma naspati,  associated,  in  the  fourth, 
with  Indka  and  Soma,  and,  in  the  fifth,  with  them  and  Dak- 
SHiNA :  the  three  next  are  addressed  to  Sadasaspati  ;  and  the 
ninth,  to  the  same,  or  to  Naeasansa. 

1.  Brahmanaspati,''  make  the  offerer  of  the  liba-      "^arcra 

'  XXXIV. 

*  The  Scholiast  furnishes  us  with  no  account  of  the  station  or 
functions  of  this  divinity.  The  etymology  will  justify  Dr.  Roth's 
definition  of  him,  as  the  deity  of  sacred  prayer,  or,  rather,  perhaps, 
of  the  text  of  the  Veda ;  but  whether  he  is  to  be  considered  as  a 
distinct  personification,  or  as  a  modified  form  of  one  of  those 
already  recognized,  and,  .especially,  of  Agni,  is  doubtful.  His 
giving  wealth,  healing  disease,  and  promoting  nourishment,  are 
properties  not  peculiar  to  him ;  and  his  being  associated  with  Lidra 
and  Soma,  whilst  it  makes  him  distinct  from  them,  leaves  him 


42  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

tion  illustrious  among  the  gods,  like  Kakshivat, 
the  son  of  Usu.^ 

2.  May  he,  who  is  opulent,  the  healer  of  disease, 
the  acquirer  of  riches,  the  augmenter  of  nourish- 
ment, the  prompt  (bestower  of  rewards),  be  favour- 
able to  us. 

3.  Protect  us,  Brahmanaspati,  so  that  no  calum- 
nious censure  of  a  malevolent  man  may  reach  us. 

4.  The  liberal  man  whom  Indra,  Brahmanaspati, 
and  Soma  protect  never  perishes. 

Agni  as  his  prototype.  His  being,  in  an  especial  manner,  con- 
nected with  prayer  appears  more  fully  in  a  subsequent  passage, 
Hymn  xl,  Agni  is,  in  an  especial  degree,  the  deity  of  the  Brah- 
man ;  and,  according  to  some  statements,  the  Rig-  Veda  is  supposed 
to  proceed  from  him;  a  notion,  however,  which,  according  to 
Medhdtithi,  the  commentator  on  Mami,  was  suggested  by  its 
opening  with  the  hymn  to  Agni,  Agnim  tie. 

^  This  story  is  to  be  found  in  several  of  the  Purdnas,  especially 
the  Matsya  and  Vuyti,  as  well  as  in  the  Mahdbhdrata,  Vol.  I., 
p.  154.  £'alcshwat  was  the  son  oi  Dirghatamas,  by  Usij\  a  female 
servant  of  the  queen  of  the  Kalinga  Rdjd,  whom  her  husband 
had  desired  to  submit  to  the  embraces  of  the  sage,  in  order  that 
he  might  beget  a  son.  The  queen  substituted  her  bondmaid  Usij: 
the  sage,  cognizant  of  the  deception,  sanctified  Usij,  and  begot, 
by  her,  a  son,  named  Kahshwat,  who,  through  his  affiliation  by 
Kalinga,  was  a  Kshattriya,  but,  as  the  son  of  L'lrghatamas,  was  a 
Brahnan.  He  was,  also,  a  RisJii;  as,  in  another  passage,  he  says  of 
himself,  aham  hahshivdn  RisMr  asmi, — I  am  the  Rishi  KahsMvat. 
The  Taittir'iyas  also  include  him  among  the  holy  persons  who  are 
qualified  to  conduct  sacrifices  and  compose  hymns.  In  the  Mahd- 
bhdrata, B'lrghatamas  disallows  the  right  of  the  king,  there  named 
Bali,  to  the  sons  of  a  Sudra  female,  and  claims  them  as  his  own. 


FIRST  ASHTAKA FIRST   ADHTAYA.  43 

5.  Do  thou,  Brahman  ASP  ATI,  and  do  you,  Soma, 
Indra,  and  Dakshina,^  protect  that  man  from  sin. 

6.  I  solicit  understanding  from  Sadasaspati,"  the  Vargaxxxv. 
wonderful,  the  friend  of  Indra,  the  desirable,  the 
bountiful  ; 

7.  Without  whose  aid  the  sacrifice  even  of  the 
wise  is  not  perfected :  he  pervades  the  association  of 
our  thoughts." 

8.  He  rewards  the  presenter  of  the  oblation  :  he 
brings  the  sacrifice  to  its  conclusion :  (through  him) 
our  invocation  reaches  the  gods. 

9.  I  have  beheld  I^arasansa,''  the  most  resolute, 
the  most  renowned,  and  radiant  as  the  heavens. 

*  Dakshind  is,  properly,  the  present  made  to  the  Brahnans, — 
at  the  conclusion  of  any  religious  rite, — here  personified  as  a 
female  divinity. 

*"  Properly,  the  master  or  protector  [pati)  of  the  assembly 
{sadas):  it  is,  here,  a  name  oiApii,  He  is  the  friend  or  associate 
of  Indra,  as,  on  this  occasion,  partaking  of  the  same  oblations. 

"  Dh'indm  yogam  inwati,  which  may  mean,  "  he  pervades  the 
association  of  our  minds,"  or,  "  the  objects  of  our  pious  acts ;"  as 
dhi  means  either,  as  usual,  luddhi,  understanding,  or  has  the 
Vaidih  sense  of  harma,  act, 

*  This  has  already  occurred,  [p.  32]  as  an  appellative  ofAgni,  and 
confirms  the  application  of  Sadasaspati  and  Brahnanaspati  to  the 
same  divinity.  According  to  KdWiahja,  it  means  the  personified 
yajna,  or  sacrifice,  at  which  men  {yiarali)  praise  {sansanti)  the  gods ; 
according  to  S'dkapuni,  it  is,  as  before  (Hymn  xni.,  v.  3),  Agni, 
he  who  is  to  be  praised  of  men.  The  same  explanation  is  quoted 
from  the  Brdhmana ;  '*  I  beheld  (with  the  eye  of  the  Fedas,)  that 
divinity,  Sadasaspati,  who  is  to  be  praised  by  men,  who  is  also 
called  Nardsansay 


44  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

Si5kta  II.  (XIX.) 

The  metre  and  RisM  are  unchanged ;  Agni  and  the  Martjts  are 

the  deities. 

■^^^i         ^'  Earnestly  art  thou  invoked  to  this  perfect  rite, 

to  drink  the  Soma  juice.     Come,  Agni,  with  the 

Maeuts. 

2.  Nor  god  nor  man  has  power  over  a  rite  (dedi- 
cated) to  thee,  who  art  mighty.  Come,  Agni,  with 
the  Maruts. 

3.  Who  all  are  divine,^  and  devoid  of  malignity, 
and  who  know  (how  to  cause  the  descent)  of  great 
waters :  ^  come,  Agni,  with  the  Maruts. 

4.  Who  are  fierce,  and  send  down  rain,°  and  are 
unsurpassed  in  strength :  come,  Agni,  with  the 
Maruts. 

*  Devdsah,  explained  dyotamdndh,  shining.  By  the  term  '  all' 
is  to  be  understood  the  seven  troops  of  the  Maruts,  as  by  the  text 
saptagand  vai  Marutah. 

^  Many  texts  ascribe  to  the  Maruts,  or  winds,  a  main  agency 
in  the  fall  of  rain  ;  as,  "  Maruts,  you  have  risen  from  the  ocean ; 
taking  the  lead,  you  have  sent  down  rain, —  Ud'irayathd,  Marutah 
samudrato  ;  Tjiiyam  vrisMim  varsliayathd,  piir'ishinah.'^  [V.,  LV., 
5  :  see  Vol.  III.,  p.  335.]  Rajas,  the  word  used  in  the  text, 
means  water,  or  light,  or  the  world. — Niglianh. 

"  Here  the  word  is  arha  :  as,  according  to  the  Vdjasaneyis, 
A'po  vd  arlcah.  The  term  is  derived  from  arch,  to  worship,  and  is 
explained  in  two  other  texts :  So  ^rcliann  acharat,  tasydrchata 
dpo'  jdyanta, — 'KQ^Eiranyagarhha) proceeded,  worshipping,  (after 
creating  the  solid  earth),  and,  from  him,  worshipping,  the  waters 
were  produced;  and,  again,  Archato  vai  me  /cam  abhut, — From  me, 
worshipping,  water  was.  Hence  the  name  arka  was  given  to 
water,  or  rain. 


FIRST   ASHT AKA — SECOND   ADHYAYA.  45 

5.  Who  are  brilliant,  of  terrific  forms,  who  are 
possessors  of  great  wealth,  and  are  devourers  of  the 
malevolent :  come,  Agni,  with  the  Maruts. 

6.  "Who   are   divinities   abiding   in   the   radiant    ^J^f,% 
heaven   above   the    sun:"    come,    Agni,    with   the 
Maruts. 

7.  Who  scatter  the  clouds,  and  agitate  the  sea 
(with  waves) :  come,  Agni,  with  the  Maruts. 

8.  Who  spread  (through  the  firmament),  along 
with  the  rays  (of  the  sun),  and,  with  their  strength, 
agitate  the  ocean : "  come,  Agni,  with  the  Maruts. 

9.  I  pour  out  the  sweet  Soma  juice,  for  thy 
drinking,  (as)  of  old.  Come,  Agni,  with  the 
Maruts. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA. 


ANUYAKA  Y.   (continued). 

SUKTA  III.  (XX.) 

Metre  and  Rishi,  as  before;    addressed  to  the  deified  mortals 
named  Erenus. 

1.  This  hymn,  the  bestower  of  riches,  has  been     Vargai. 

*  In  the  heaven  {divi,  i.e.,  dyulohe);  above  the  sun  ndhasyddU, 
i.e.,  siiryasyopari).  Ndha,  here  explained  sun,  is,  more  usually, 
explained,  sky,  or  heaven. 

^  The  influence  of  the  winds  upon  the  sea,  alluded  to  in  this 
and  the  preceding  verse,  indicates  more  familiarity  with  the  ocean 
than  we  should  have  expected  from  the  traditional  inland  position 
of  the  earlv  Hindus. 


46  RIG-VEDA   SANHITi. 

addressed,   by  the  sages,  with  their  own  mouths, 
to  the  (class  of)  divinities  having  birth.^ 

2.  They  who  created,  mentally,  for  Indea,  the 
horses  that  are  harnessed  at  his  words,  have  par- 
taken of  the  sacrifice  performed  with  holy  acts.'' 

*  Devaya  janmane,  literally,  to  the  divine  or  brilliant  birth : 
but  the  Scholiast  explains  the  latter,  jdyamdndya,  being  born,  or 
having  birth ;  and  the  former,  derasanghdya,  a  class  of  divinities, 
that  is,  the  Rihhus,  of  -whom  it  is  only  said,  that  they  were  pious 
men,  who,  through  penance,  obtained  deification, — manushydh 
santas  ta^Msd  devatioam  prdptdh.  Thanks  to  the  learning  and 
industry  of  M.  Neve,  of  the  University  of  Louvain,  we  are  fully 
acquainted  with  the  history  and  character  of  the  Rihhus,  as  they 
appear  in  different  portions  of  the  Rig-veda. — Essai  sur  le  My  the 
des  Rihhavas.  Their  origin  and  actions  are,  also,  narrated  in  the 
Niti-manjar'i,  as  well  as  in  the  notes  of  Sdyana  on  this  and  other 
similar  passages.  The  Rihhus  were  the  three  sons  of  Sudhanwan, 
a  descendant  (the  N'lti-manjar'i  says,  a  son)  of  Angiras,  severally 
named  Rihhu,  Vihhu,  and  Vdja,  and  styled,  collectively,  Rihhus, 
from  the  name  of  the  elder.  Through  their  assiduous  performance 
of  good  works, — swapas  (su-apas), — they  obtained  divinity,  exer- 
cised superhuman  powers,  and  became  entitled  to  receive  praise  and 
adoration.  They  are  supposed  to  dwell  in  the  solar  sphere  ;  and 
there  is  an  indistinct  identification  of  them  with  the  rays  of  the 
sun :  but,  whether  typical,  or  not,  they  prove  the  admission,  at 
an  early  date,  of  the  doctrine  that  men  might  become  divinities. 

^  S'amibhir  yajnam  dsata.  M.  Neve  renders  it :  [ils~\  ont  ohtenu 
le  sacrifice  par  leurs  ceuvres  meritoires ;  M.  Langlois,  ils  ont  entoure 
le  sacrifice  de  ceremonies  {saintes) ;  Mr.  Stevenson,  they  pervade  owr 
sacrifice  hy  purificatory  rites ;  Eosen,  literally,  ceremoniis  sacri- 
ficium  acccpernnt.  That  three  simple  words  should  admit  of  this 
variety  of  rendering  shows  the  vagueness  of  some  of  the  Vaidik 
expressions.     The  sense  seems  to  be,  they  have  pervaded,  appro- 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  47 

3.  They  constructed,  for  the  I^Tasatyas,  a  univer- 
sally-moving and  easy  car,  and  a  cow  yielding  milk.^ 

4.  The  RiBHUs,  uttering  unfailing  prayers,"  en- 
dowed with  rectitude,  and  succeeding'  (in  all  pious 
acts),  made"*  their  (aged)  parents  young. 

5.  RiBHUS,  the  exhilarating  juices  are  offered  to 

priated,  or  accepted,  the  sacrifice  ofi'ered  (which  last  word  is 
understood),  with  ther  usual  implements  and  observances  {sam'i- 
bhih,  ceremoniis) ;  as  Sdyana,  grahachamasddinishpddanarupaih 
karmahhir,  yajnam,  asmad'iyam  dsata  {vydptavantah),  they  have 
pervaded  (or  accepted)  our  sacrifice,  performed  with  those  acts 
which  are  executed  by  the  means  of  tongs,  ladles,  and  other 
(utensils  employed  in  making  oblations).  The  expression  may, 
perhaps,  obscurely  intimate  the  invention  of  the  implements  so 
used,  by  the  JRibhus ;  their  modification  of  one  of  which,  at  least, 
is  subsequently  referred  to  (v.  6),  while  other  expressions  imply 
mechanical  skill, 

*  Tahhan,  for  atahhan  ;  literally,  they  chipped,  or  fabricated. 
So,  in  the  preceding  verse,  they  carved  (tatahhuh)  Indra's  horses. 
There,  it  is  said,  they  did  so  mentally  (manasa) ;  but,  in  this  verse, 
there  is  no  such  qualification;  and  the  meaning  of  the  verb 
implies  mechanical  formation.  The  Rihhus  may  have  been  the 
first  to  attempt  the  bodily  representation  of  these  appendages  of 
Indra  and  the  Aswins. 

"  Satyamantrdh,  having,  or  repeating,  true  prayers,  i.e.,  which 
were  certain  of  obtaining  the  objects  prayed  for.  There  is  some 
variety  in  the  renderings,  here,  also ;  but  it  was  scarcely  necessary, 
as  the  meaning  is  clear  enough. 

"  Visht'i,  for  visht'ayah:  according  to  the  Scholiast,  vydpti- 
yulitdh,  in  which  vydpti  means,  encountering  no  opposition  in  all 
acts,  through  the  efficacy  of  their  true  or  infallible  mantras. 

^  Akrata,  from  kri,  to  make,  generally  ;  not,  as  before, 
atakahan,  to  make  mechanically. 


48  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

you,  along  with  Indra,  attended  by  the  Maruts, 
and  along  with  the  brilliant  Adityas/ 
Vargaii.         6.  The  RiBHus  have  divided  into  four  the  new 
ladle,"  the  work  of  the  divine  Twashtri. 

7.  May  they,  moved  by  our  praises,  give,  to  the 
offerer  of  the  libation,  many  precious  things,  and 
perfect  the  thrice  seven  sacrifices." 

^  According  to  Aswaldyana,  as  quoted  by  Sat/ana,  the  libations 
offered  at  the  third  daily  (or  evening)  sacrifice  are  presented  to 
Indra,  along  with  the  Adityas,  together  with  RihJiu,  Vihhu,  and 
Vdja,  with  Brihaspati  and  the  Viswadevas. 

^  Twasht'ri,  in  the  Paurdnih  mythology,  is  the  carpenter  or 
artisan  of  the  gods  :  so  SdyuTia  says,  of  him,  he  is  a  divinity  whose 
duty,  with  relation  to  the  gods,  is  carpentry, — devasamhandhi  taJc- 
shmiavydpdrah.  Whether  he  has  Vaidik  authority  of  a  more 
decisive  description  than  the  allusion  of  the  text  does  not  appear. 
The  same  may  be  said  of  his  calling  the  Rihhus  the  disciples  of 
Twasht'ri, — Twasltt'uh  sishydh  Rihhavah.  The  act  ascribed  to  them, 
in  the  text,  of  making  one  ladle  four,  has,  probably,  rather  refer- 
ence to  some  innovation  in  the  objects  of  libation,  than  to  the  mere 
multiplication  of  the  wooden  spoons  used  to  pour  out  the  Soma 
juice.  The  Niti-manjar'i  says,  that  Agni,  coming  to  a  sacrifice 
which  the  Rihhus  celebrated,  became  as  one  of  them,  and,  there- 
fore, they  made  the  ladle  fourfold,  that  each  might  have  his  share. 

"  Trir  d  sd2)tdni.  The  Scholiast  considers  that  trih  may  be 
applied  to  precious  things,  as  meaning  best,  middling,  worst;  or 
to  sdptdni,  seven  sacrifices,  as  classed  under  three  heads.  Thus, 
one  class  consists  of  the  Agnyddheya,  seven  ceremonies  in  which 
clarified  butter  is  offered  on  fire ;  one  class  consists  of  the  Pdlca- 
yajnas,  in  which  dressed  viands  are  offered  to  the  Viswadevas 
and  others ;  and  one  comprehends  the  Agnisht'oma  class,  in  which 
libations  of  Soma  juice  are  the  characteristic  offering. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  49 

8.  Offerers  (of  sacrifices),  they  lielcP  (a  mortal 
existence) :  by  their  pious  acts  they  obtained  a  share 
of  sacrifices  with  the  gods. 

Si5kta  IV.   (XXI.) 

Rishi  and  metre  the  same :  the  Hymn  is  addressed  to  Indka  and 

Agxi. 

1.  I   invoke   hither  Indra  and  Agni,  to  Avhom    ^^"^^^  ii^- 
we  desire  to  present  our  praise.     Let  them,  who  are, 

both,  copious  drinkers  of  the  Soma  juice,  (accept  the 
libation). 

2.  Praise,  men,  Indra  and  Agni,  in  sacrifices ; 
decorate  them  (with  ornaments);  and  hymn  them 
with  hymns. 

3.  We  invoke  Indra  and  Agni, — for  the  benefit  of 
our  friend  (the  institutor  of  the  rite), — drinkers  of 
the  Soma  juice,  to  drink  the  libation. 

4.  We  invoke  the  two  who  are  fierce  (to  their 
foes),  to  attend  the  rite  where  the  libation  is  pre- 
pared.   Indra  and  Agni,  come  liither. 

5.  May  those  two,  Indra   and   Agni,   who   are 


^  Adhdrayanta,  they  held,  or  enjoyed,  is  all  the  text  gives : 
what  they  held  is  not  specified.  The  Scholiast  supplies  ^;ra«o«, 
vital  airs,  life  :  his  addition  is  in  harmony  with  other  tests. 
Martdsah  santo  amritatwmn  dnasuli, — Being  mortals,  they  ob- 
tained immortality.  Their  partaking  of  sacrifices  is,  also,  re- 
peatedly stated  :  Sauclhanioand  yajniyam  hhdgam  dnasa, — By  the 
son  of  Sudhanivan  was  a  sacrificial  portion  acquired.  [See  V"o]. 
III.,  p.  106,  note  2.]  Ribhavo  vai  devesJm  ta2)asd  somaiMham 
abhyajayan,  —  The  Rihhus  won,  by  devotion,  the  drinking  of 
Soma  among  the  gods. 


60  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

mighty,  and  guardians  of  the  assemblyj  render  the 
RdJcshasas  innocuous;  and  may  the  devourers  (of 
men)  be  destitute  of  progeny. 

6.  By  this  unfailing  sacrifice  be  you  rendered 
vigilant,  Indra  and  Agni,  in  the  station  which 
affords  knowledge  (of  the  consequences  of  acts) ;  and 
bestow  upon  us  happiness. 

SiJkta  V.  (XXII.) 

The  Rishi  and  metre  continue :  the  Hymn  consists  of  twenty-one 
stanzas,  which  are  addressed  to  a  variety  of  divinities,  or,  four, 
to  the  As  WINS,  and  four,  to  Savitei  ;  the  next  two,  to  Agni  ; 
the  eleventh,  to  the  goddesses,  collectively ;  the  twelfth,  to  the 
wives  of  Indea,  Yaeiina,  and  Agni  ;  the  two  next,  to  Heaven 
and  Earth ;  the  fifteenth,  to  Earth  alone  ;  and  the  last  six,  to 
Vishnu. 

Varga  IV.  1.  Awakcu  the  As  WINS,  associated  for  the  morn- 
ing sacrifice.  Let  them,  both,  come  hither,  to  drink 
of  this  Soma  juice. 

2.  We  invoke  the  two  As  wins,  who  are,  both, 
divine,  the  best  of  charioteers,  riding  in  an  excellent 
car,  and  attaining  heaven. 

3.  AswiNS,  stir  up^  the  sacrifice  with  your  whip 

*  Mimihsliatam,  mix  intimately  the  juice  of  the  Soma.  It  is 
not  clear  how  this  is  to  be  done  with  the  whip ;  allusion  to  which 
only  intimates,  it  is  said,  that  the  Akoins  should  come  quickly. 
Tayd,  hy  that,  may,  also,  mean  "with  that," — come  with  that  your 
whip  :  or  ham,  commonly,  a  whip,  may  mean  speech';  in  which 
case,  madhwnai'i  and  sunriU'wati,  explained  wet  and  loud,  will 
signify  sweet  and  veracious, — come  witli  such  speech,  As/cms, 
and  taste  the  libation. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SECOND   ADHYAYA.  51 

that  is  wet  with  the  foam  (of  your  horses),   and 
lashing  loudly. 

4.  The  abode  of  the  offerer  of  the  libation  is  not 
far  from  you,  AswiNS,  going  thither  in  your  car. 

5.  I  invoke  Savitri,  the  golden-handed,''  to  pro- 
tect me :  he  will  appoint  the  station  of  the  wor- 
shippers. 

6.  Glorify  Savitei,  who  is  no  friend  to  water,''    '^^^'S^  ^^ 
for   our   protection.      We   desire   to   celebrate   his 
worship. 

7.  We  invoke  Savitri,  the  enlightener  of  men, 
the  dispenser  of  various  home-ensuring  wealth. 

8.  Sit  down,  friends.  Savitri,  verily,  is  to  be 
praised  by  us ;  for  he  is  the  giver  of  riches. 

9.  Agni,  bring  hither  the  loving  wives  of  the 
gods,  and  Twashtri,  to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 


Smitri  is,  ordinarily,  a  synonym  of  the  Sun.  Golden-handed, 
hiranyapdni,  is  explained,  either  he  who  gives  gold  to  the  wor- 
shipper, or  by  a  Vaidih  legend : — At  a  sacrifice  performed  by  the 
gods,  Siirya  undertook  the  office  of  Ritwij,  but  placed  himself  in 
the  station  of  the  Bralimd.  The  Adlncaryu  priests,  seeing  him 
in  that  position,  gave  him  the  oblation  termed  Prusitra,  which,  as 
soon  as  received  by  Suri/a,  cut  off  the  hand  that  had  improperly 
accepted  it.  The  priests  who  had  given  the  oblation  bestowed 
upon  Surya  a  hand  of  gold.  The  legend  is  narrated  in  the  Kau- 
sMtaki  Brdhmana,  it  is  said ;  but,  there,  Siirya  loses  both  his  hands. 

^Apdm  napdtam  might  be  thought  to  mean  sou  of  the  waters ; 
as  najidt  is  often  used,  in  the  Veda,  in  that  sense :  but  the  Sun  is 
rather  the  parent,  than  the  progeny,  of  the  waters ;  as,  Aditydj 
jdyate  vrisMih, — Rain  is  born  from  the  sun.  JVapdt  is  here  taken 
in  its  literal  purport,  who  does  not  cherish  {na  pdtayati),  but  dries 
them  up  by  his  heat,  santdpena  soshalcah. 


52  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

10,  Youthful  Agni,  bring  hither,  for  our  protec- 
tion, the  wives  (of  the  gods),  Hotra,  Bharati, 
Yartjtri,  and  Dhishana.'' 
Varga  VT.  11.  May  the  goddesses,  whose  wings  are  un- 
dipped,'' the  protectresses  of  mankind,  favour  us 
with  protection,  and  with  entire  felicity. 

12.  I  invoke  hither  Indrani,  Varunani,  and 
Agnati,  for  our  welfare,  and  to  drink  the  Soma 
juice. 

13.  May  the  great  heaven  and  the  earth  be 
pleased  .to  blend  this  sacrifice  (with  their  own  dews), 
and  fill  us  with  nutriment. 

14.  The  wise  taste,  through  their  pious  acts,  the 
ghee-resembling  waters  of  these  two,  (abiding)  in 
the  permanent  region  of  the  Gandharvas.^ 

15.  Earth,    be   thou  wide-spreading,^  free  from 

"  Hotra  is  called  the  wife  of  Agni,  or  the  personified  invoca- 
tion ;  Bhdrat'i,  of  Bharata,  one  of  the  Adityas.  It  is  rather 
doubtful  if  Varutr'i  be  a  proper  name,  or  an  epithet  of  the  fol- 
lowing: it  is  explained  by  varaiiU/d,  who  is  to  be  chosen  or  pre- 
ferred, who  is  excellent.  Dhisliand  is  a  synonym  of  Vdch  or 
Vdgdein,  the  goddess  of  speech. 

^  Achchhinnapatrdh,  The  only  explanation  given  by  the  Scho- 
liast is,  that,  the  wives  of  the  gods  being  in  the  form  of  birds,  no 
one  had  cut  their  wings. 

'^  The  sphere  of  the  Gandharvas,  Takshas,  and  Apsarasas  is 
the  antariJcsJia,  the  atmosphere,  or  firmament  between  heaven  and 
earth,  and,  so  far,  considered  as  the  common  or  connecting  station 
of  them  both, — A'Mse  vartamdnayoh  *  dydvaprithivyoh. 

^  Syona  has,  sometimes,  the  sense  of  expanded ;  sometimes,  of 
pleasant,  agreeable.  The  stanza  is  repeated,  it  is  said,  at  the 
ceremony  termed  MaJtdndmni,  at  the  same  time  touching  the  earth. 


FIRST   ASHTAELl — SECOND    ADHyIyA.  53 

thorns,  and  our  abiding  place :  give  us  great  hap- 
piness. 

16.  May  the  gods  preserve  us  (from  that  portion)  VargaVii. 
of  the  earth  whence  Vishnu,  (aided)  by  the  seven 
metres,  stepped.'' 

17.  YiSHNU  traversed  this  (world) :  three  times 
he  planted  his  foot ;"  and  the  whole  (world)  was 
collected  in  the  dust  of  his  (footstep). 

*  VisMu  is  explained,  by  Sdyaiia,  by  Parameswara,  the  supreme 
ruler,  or,  in  his  annotation  on  the  next  verse,  to  mean,  he  who 
enters  into,  or  who  pervades,  the  world, —  Vishnur  visafer  vd  vyas- 
noter  vd.  Vi  chakrmne,  '  stepped,'  he  explains  by  vividhapada- 
hramanam  kritavdn, — he  made  the  going  of  various  steps.  Eosen 
translates  it  transgressus.  According  to  the  Taittir'iyas,  as  cited 
by  the  Scholiast,  the  gods,  with  Vislmu  at  their  head,  subdued  . 
the  invincible  earth,  using  the  seven  metres  of  the  Veda  as  their 
instruments.  Sdyaiia  conceives  the  text  to  allude  to  the  Trivih- 
rama  Avatdm,  in  which  Vishnu  traversed  the  three  worlds  in  three 
steps.  The  phrase  "preserve  us  from  the  earth"  implies,  according 
to  the  commentary,  the  hinderance  of  the  sin  of  those  inhabiting 
the  earth, — bhtdolce  vartamdnnndm  2Jdpanivdranam  :  but  the  pas- 
sage is  obscure. 

^  This  looks  still  more  like  an  allusion  to  the  fourth  Avatdra, 
although  no  mention  is, made  of  king  Eali,  or  the  dwarf;  and 
these  may  have  been  subsequent  grafts  upon  the  original  tradition 
of  Vishhi's  three  paces.  Commentators  are  not  agreed  upon  the 
meaning  of  the  sentence  "thrice  he  planted  his  step," — tredhd 
ni  dadlie  padam.  According  to  S'dkapuiii,  it  was  on  earth,  in  the 
firmament,  in  heaven ;  according  to  Aurnavdbha,  on  Samdrohana, 
or  the  eastern  mountain,  on  Vishniipada,  the  meridian  sky,  and 
Gayasiras,  the  western  mountain ;  thus  identifying  Vishnu  with  the 
Sun,  and  his  three  paces,  with  the  rise,  culmination,  and  setting,  of 
that  luminary.     Allusion  is  made  to  the  three  paces  of  Vishnu^  in 


54  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

18.  Vishnu,  the  preserver,"  the  uninjurable, 
stepped  three  steps,  upholding,  thereby,  righteous 
acts. 

19.  Behold  the  deeds  of  Vishnu,  through  which 
(the  worshipper)  has  accomplished  (pious)  vows.  He 
is  the  worthy  friend  of  Indea. 

20.  The  wise  ever  contemplate  that  supreme 
station  of  Vishnu  ;"   as  the  eye  ranges  over  the  sky. 

21.  The    wise, — ever   vigilant,  and   diligent    in 

praise, — amply  glorify  that  which  is  the  supreme 

station  of  Vishnu. 

SUKTA  VI.  (XXIII.) 

The  Rishi  is,  still,  Medhatithi,  the  son  of  KAi^WA :  the  metre  of 
the  first  eighteen  stanzas  is  Gcujatr'i ;  in  stanza  nineteen,  Fura 
Ushiiih ;  in  twenty-one,  Pratishthd;  and,  in  the  rest,  Auusht'ubh. 
The  Hymn  consists  of  twenty-four  stanzas,  of  which  the  first  is 
addressed  to  Vatu;  the  two  next,  to  Indea  and  Vatu;  then  three, 
to  MiTEA  and  Yaettna  ;  three,  to  Iis^dea  and  the  Maeitts  ; 
three,  to  the  Viswadevas;  three,  to  Pushan  ;  seven  and  a  half, 
to  the  Waters ;  and  the  last  verse  and  a  half,  to  Agni. 

Varga  VIII.        1.  Those  sharp  and  blessing-bearing  Soma  juices 

the  Vdjasaneyi  Sanhitd  of  the  Yajar-Veda ;  and  the  Scholiast 
there  explains  them  to  imply  the  pi'esence  of  VisMm  in  the  three 
regions  of  earth,  air,  and  heaven,  in  the  forms,  respectively,  of 
Agni,  Vc'iyu,  and  Suri/a, — fire,  wind,  and  the  sun.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  expression  was,  originally,  allegorical,  and  that  it 
served  as  the  groundwork  of  the  Paurdnih  fiction  of  the  Vdmana 
or  dwarf  Avatdra. 

*  Gopdh  sarvasya  jagato  rahJiakah,  the  preserver  of  all  the 
world,  is  the  explanation  of  Sdyaria ;  thus  recognizing  VisMu^s 
principal  and  distinguishing  attribute. 

''  Paramam  padam,  supreme  degree  or  station.  The  Scholiast 
says  Swarga  ;  but  that  is  very  (questionable. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  55 

are  poured  out.    Come,  Vayu,  and  drink  of  them,  as 
presented. 

2.  We  invoke  both  the  divinities  abiding  in 
heaven,  Indra  and  Vayu,  to  drink  of  this  Soma 
juice. 

3.  The  wise  invoke,  for  their  preservation,  Indra 
and  Vayu,  who  are  swift  as  thought,  have  a  thou- 
sand eyes,"  and  are  protectors  of  pious  acts. 

4.  We  invoke  Mitra  and  Varuna,  becoming 
present  at  the  sacrifice,  and  of  pure  strength,  to 
drink  the  Soma  juice. 

5.  I  invoke  Mitra  and  Varuna,  who,  with  tnie 
speech,  are  the  encouragers  of  pious  acts,  and  are 
lords  of  true  light.^' 

6.  May  Varuna  be  our  especial  protector ;  may    Varga  ix. 
Mitra   defend   us   with   all   defences  :    may   they 

make  us  most  opulent. 

7.  We  invoke  Indra,  attended  by  the  Maruts, 


^  The  attribution  of  a  thousand  eyes  to  Indra,  literally  under- 
stood, is  a  Paufduik  legend :  it  is  nowhere  said  of  Vdtjti,  and, 
here,  is  applied  to  him,  it  is  said,  only  by  the  grammatical  con- 
struction,— saliasrdkshd  being  in  the  dual, —  to  agree  with  the  two 
substantives  Indra  and  Vdyu  ;  and  it  is,  probably,  stated  oi  Indra, 
or  the  personified  heaven,  either  to  signify  its  expansiveness,  or  its 
being  studded  with  constellations,  whence  it  suggested  the  legend. 
In  like  manner,  manojuvd,  swift  as  thought,  although  equally  in 
the  dual  number,  is,  properly,  applicable  to  Vdyu  only. 

''  Ritasyajijotishaspat'i.  Mitra'and  Varuna  are  included  among 
the  Adityas,  or  monthly  suns,  in  the  Vaidih  enumeration  of  the 
eight  sons  of  Aditi.  S'rutyantare  cMsht'au  putrdso  aditcr  ityupa- 
hramya  mitras  cha  varunas  chetyddikam  dnmdtam. 


56  RIG- VEDA    SAKHITA. 

to  drink  the  Soma  juice.     May  he,  with  his  asso- 
ciates, be  satisfied. 

8.  Divine  Maeuts, — of  whom  Indea  is  the  chief,  and 
PiJSHAN,''  the  benefactor, — all  hear  my  invocations  ! 

9.  Liberal  donors,  along  with  the  miglity  and 
associated  Indea,  destroy  Vritea  :  let  not  the  evil 
one  prevail  against  us. 

10.  We  invoke  all  the  divine  Maruts,  who  are 
fierce,  and  have  the  (many-coloured)  earth  for  their 
mother,''  to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

Varga  X.  H-  Whenever,  leaders  (of  men),  you  accept  an 
auspicious  (ofi'ering),  then  the  shout  of  the  Maeuts 
spreads  with  exultation,  like  (that)  of  conquerors. 

12.  May  the  Maeuts,  born  from  the  brilliant 
lightning,''  everywhere  preserve  us,  and  make  us 
happy. 

13.  Eesplendent  and  (swift)  moving  Pushan, 
bring  from  heaven  the  [Soma)  juice,  in  combination 
with  the  variegated  sacred  grass ;  as  (a  man  brings 
back)  an  animal  that  was  lost. 

*  The  Maruts  are  styled  Pushardtayah,  of  whom  Pushan  is  the 
donor,  or  benefactor  ;  in  what  way  is  not  specified. 

*•  Prisnimdtarah, — who  have Prisni  for  their  mother.  According 
to  Sdyana,  Prisni  is  the  many-coloured  earth, — 7idndvarnayuktd 
bhiik.  In  the  Nighant'u,  Prisni  is  a  synonym  of  sky,  or  heaven 
in  general.  In  some  texts,  as  Rosen  shows,  it  occurs  as  a  name 
of  the  Sun. 

'^  Ilashdrdd  vidyutah.  The'  Scholiast  explains  the  latter,  va- 
riously shining,  that  is,  the  antariksha,  or  firmament :  but  it 
does  not  seem  necessaiy  to  depart  from  the  usual  sense  of  vidyiit, 
lightninc:. 


FIEST   ASHTAKA — SECOND   ADHYATA.  57 

14.  The  resplendent  Pushan  has  found  the  royal 
[Soma  juice),  although  concealed,  hidden  in  a  secret 
place,''  strewed  amongst  the  sacred  grass. 

15.  Yerily,  he  has  brought  to  me,  successively, 
the  six"  (seasons),  connected  with  the  drops  (of  the 
Soma  juice) ;  as  (a  husbandman)  repeatedly  ploughs 
(the  earth)  for  barley. 

16.  Mothers*'  to  us  who  are  desirous  of  sacri-    Varga  xi. 
ficing,  the  kindred  (waters)  flow  by  the  paths  (of 
sacrifice),  qualifying  the  milk  (of  kine)  with  sweet- 
ness. 

17.  May  those  waters  which  are  contiguous  to 
the  Sun,^  and  those  with  which  the  Sun  is  associated, 
be  propitious  to  our  rite. 

18.  I  invoke  the  divine  waters  in  which  our 
cattle  drink.   Offer  oblations  to  the  flowing  (streams). 

19.  Ambrosia  is  in  the  waters;  in  the  waters  are 
medicinal  herbs.  Therefore,  divine  (priests),''  be 
prompt  in  their  praise. 


^  The  phrase  is  giihd  hltam,  placed  in  a  cave,  or  in  a  place 
diflBcult  of  access ;  or,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  heaven, — guhd- 
sadrise  durgame  dyuloke  sthitam. 

^  The  text  has  only  shai,  six :  the  Scholiast  supplies  vasan- 
tddm  ritun,  the  seasons, — spring,  and  the  rest. 

®  AmhayaJi,  which  may  mean  either  mothers,  or  waters,  as  in 
the  KaushUahi  Brdhmaila, — Apo  vd  amlayali. 

**  So  in  another  text,  A^^ah  surge  samdhitdh,  the  waters  are 
collected  in  the  Sun. 

^  The  term  is  devdh,  gods  :  but  this  were  incompatible  with  the 
direction  to  praise  the  waters.  It  is,  therefore,  explained,  the 
Ritwij  and  other  Brdhnams ;  and  the  interpretation  is  defended 


58  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

20.  Soma  has  declared  to  me  :'  "  All  medicaments, 
as  well  as  Agni,  the  benefactor  of  the  universe,  are 
in  the  waters."  The  waters  contain  all  healing  herbs. 
VargaSii.  21.  Waters,  bring  to  perfection  all  disease-dis- 
pelling medicaments,  for  (the  good  of)  my  body, 
that  I  may  long  behold  the  sun. 

22.  Waters,  take  away  whatever  sin  has  been 
(found)  in  me,  whether  I  have  (knowingly)  done 
wrong,  or  have  pronounced  imprecations  (against 
holy  men),  or  (have  spoken)  untruth. 

23.  I  have  this  day  entered  into  the  waters  :  we 
have  mingled  with  their  essence.^  Agni,  abiding  in 
the  waters,  approach,  and  fill  me,  thus  (bathed),  with 
vigour. 

24.  Agni,  confer  upon  me  vigour,  progeny,  and 
life,  so  that  the  gods  may  know  the  (sacrifice)  of 
this  my  (employer),  and  Indra,  with  the  RisMs, 
may  know  it. 

by  a  text  whicli  calls  the  Brahmans  present  divinities,  Ete  vai 
devdh  pratyaksham  yad  Brdhmandh, — These  deities,  who  are  per- 
ceptibly (present),  are  the  Brahmans. 

°-  To  Medhutithiy  the  author  of  the  hymn.  The  presidency  of 
Soma  over  medicinal  plants  is,  generally,  attributed  to  him.  The 
entrance  of  Ac/ni  into  the  water  is  noticed  in  many  places;  as, 
So' pah  prdvisat,  in  the  Taittirvja  Brdhmafia.  This,  however,  refers 
to  a  legend  of  Ayni's  hiding  himself,  through  fear.  It  may 
allude  to  the  subservience  of  water,  or  liquids,  to  digestion,  pro- 
moting the  internal  or  digestive  heat,  or  agni. 

^  Rasena  samagasmahi  ;  that  is,  the  Scholiast  says,  wc  have 
become  associated  with  the  essence  of  water,  jalasdreiia  sangatdh 
small. 


FIRST   ASHTAK^i — SECOND   ADHYAYA.  59 

ANUYAKA  VI. 

SUKTA    I.    (XXIV.) 

This  is  the  first  of  a  series  of  seven  Hymns  constituting  this  sec- 
tion, attributed  to  S'uNAnsEPA,  the  son  of  Ajigaeta.''  The 
metre  is  Trisht'iibh,  except  in  stanzas  three,  four,  and  five,  in 
which  it  is  Gdyatri.  The  first  verse  is  addressed  to  Peajapati  ; 
the  second,  to  Agni  ;  the  three  next,  to  Savitei,  or  the  last  of 
the  three,  to  Bhaga  ;  the  rest,  to  Vaexjna. 

1.  Of  whom,  or  of  wliicli  divinity  of  the  immor-  varga  xiii. 

*  The  story  of  S'lmahsepa,  or,  as  usually  written,  S'unahsej^ha, 
has  been,  for  some  time,  known  to  Sanskrit  students,  through  the 
version  of  it  presented  in  the  Rdmuijana,  b.  i,,  ch.  61,  Schlegel ; 
63,  Gorresio.  He  is,  there,  called  the  son  of  the  Rishi  RicMlca, 
and  is  sold  for  a  hundred  cows,  by  his  father,  to  AmlarisJia,  king 
of  Ayodhyd,  as  a  victim  for  a  human  sacrifice.  On  the  road,  he 
comes  to  the  lake  Pushlcara,  where  he  sees  Viswdmitra,  and 
implores  his  succour,  and  learns,  from  him,  a  prayer,  by  the  re- 
petition of  which,  at  the  stake,  Tndra  is  induced  to  come  and  set 
him  free.  It  is  obvious,  that  this  story  has  been  derived  from 
the  Veda;  for  Visiodmitra  teaches  him,  according  to  Schlegel's 
text,  two  gdthds, — according  to  Gorrcsio's,  a  mantra :  but  the 
latter  also  states,  that  he  propitiated  Indra  by  Richas  ;  mantras  of 
the  Rig-  Veda  {Righhis  tusMdva  devendram),  Vol.  I.,  p.  249.  Manu 
also  alludes  to  the  story  (X.,  105),  where  it  is  said  that  AJ'igarta 
incurred  no  guilt  by  giving  up  his  son  to  be  sacrificed  ;  as  it  was 
to  preserve  himself  and  family  from  perishing  with  hunger.  KuUa- 
IcaBhatta  names  the  son  S\mahsepha,  and  refers,  for  his  authority,  to 
the  Bahwricha  Bruhmaiia.  The  story  is  told,  in  fuU  detail,  in  the 
Aitareya  Brdhmana ;  but  the  Rdjd  is  named  Harischandra.  He  has 
no  sons,  and  worships  Varuiia,  in  order  to  obtain  a  son,  promising 
to  sacrifice  to  him  his  first-born.  He  has  a  son,  in  consequence, 
named  Rohiia ;  but,  when  Varuiia  claims  his  victim,  the  king  delays 
the  sacrifice,  under  various  pretexts,  from  time  to  time,  until  Rohita 


60  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

tals,  shall  we  invoke  the  auspicious  name  ?'"     Who 


attains  adolescence,  when  his  father  communicates  to  him  the  fate 
for  which  he  was  destined.  Roliita  refuses  submission,  and  spends 
several  years  in  the  forests,  away  from  home.  He,  at  last,  meets, 
there,  with  Aj'igarta,  a  Rishi,  in  great  distress,  and  persuades  him 
to  part  with  his  second  son,  Si'imahkplia,  to  be  substi-tuted  for 
Rohita,  as  an  offering  to  Varum.  The  bargain  is  concluded ;  and 
S'unahsepha  is  about  to  be  sacrificed,  when,  by  the  advice  of  Viswd- 
mitra,  one  of  the  oflSciating  priests,  he  appeals  to  the  gods,  and 
is,  ultimately,  liberated.  The  Aitareya  Brdhmam  has  supplied 
the  commentator  with  the  circumstances  which  he  narrates,  as 
illustrative  of  the  series  of  hymns  in  this  section.  Dr.  Rosen 
doubts  if  the  hymns  bear  any  reference  to  the  intention  of  sacri- 
ficing Siuiahse2jJia :  but  the  language  of  the  Brdhma/ia  is  not  to  be 
mistaken ;  as  Aj'igarta  not  only  ties  his  son  to  the  stake,  but  goes 
to  provide  himself  with  a  knife,  with  which  to  slay  him.  At  the 
same  time,  it  must  be  admitted,  that  the  language  of  the  Sulci  as 
is  somewhat  equivocal,  and  leaves  the  intention  of  an  actual 
sacrifice  open  to  question.  The  Bhdgavata  follows  the  Aitarexja 
and  Ifanu,  in  terming  8'tcnaMepha  the  son  of  Aj'igarta,  and 
names  the  Rdj'd,  also,  HariscJiandra.  In  the  Vishnu  Purdna,  he 
is  called  the  son  of  Vikvdmitra,  and  is  termed,  also,  Devardta,  or 
God-given.  But  this  relates  to  subsequent  occurrences,  noticed, 
in  like  manner,  by  the  other  authorities,  in  which  he  becomes  the 
adopted  son  of  Viswdmitra,  and  the  eldest  of  all  his  sons;  such 
of  whom  as  refused  to  acknowledge  his  seniority  being  cursed 
to  become  the  founders  of  various  barbarian  and  outcaste  races. 
Viswdmitra^ s  share  in  the  legend  may,  possibly,  intimate  his 
opposition,  and  that  of  some  of  his  disciples,  to  human  sacrifices. 
^  Supposed  to  be  uttered  by  S'unaMepa,  when  bound  to  the 
giqM,  or  stake,  as  the  2}urushapasu,  the  man-animal  (or  victim), 
as  the  Bhdgavata  terms  him.  "Of  whom"  {hasya)  may  also  be 
rendered,  of  Brahmd,  or  Prajdpati,  one  of  whose  names,  in  the 
Veda,  is  Ka  ;  as,  Ko  ha  vai  ndma  Prajdpatih. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYATA.  61 

will  give  us  to  the  great  Aditi,'*  that  I  may  again 
behold  my  father  and  my  mother  ? 

2.  Let  us  invoke  the  auspicious  name  of  Agni,'' 
the  first' divinity  of  the  immortals,  that  he  may  give 
us  to  the  great  Aditi,  and  that  I  may  behold  again 
my  father  and  my  mother. 

3.  Ever-protecting  Savitri,"  we  solicit  (our)  por- 
tion of  thee, — who  art  the  lord  of  affluence, — 

4.  That  wealth  which  has  been  retained  in  thy 
hands,  and  is  entitled  to  commendation,  as  exempt 
from  envy  or  reproach. 

5.  We  are  assiduous  in  attaining  the  summit  of 
affluence,  through  the  protection  of  thee,  who  art 
the  possessor  of  wealth. 

6.  These  birds,  that  are  flying  (through  the  air),    ^^^^^  -^^^• 
have  not  obtained,  Yaruna,**  thy  bodily  strength,  or 

thy  prowess,  nor  (are  able  to  endure  thy)  wrath ; 


*  Aditi,  according  to  Sdyaiia,  here  means  '  earth.' 

''  A  passage  from  the  Aitareya  Bruhmaiia  is  cited,  by  the 
Scholiast,  stating  that  Prajdpati  said  to  him  {Slinahsepa),  "  Have 
recourse  to  Agni,  who  is  the  nearest  of  the  gods ;"  upon  which  he 
resorted  to  Agni :  Tarn  PrajnjMtir  tivuchdgnir  vai  devunum  7iedish~ 
t'kas  tarn  evopadhdveti ;  so^gnim  upasasdra. 

"  In  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas,  application  is  made  to 
Savitri,  by  the  advice,  it  is  said,  oi  Agni ;  not,  however,  it  may  be 
remarked,  for  liberation,  but  for  riches, — a  request  rather  irre- 
concileable  with  the  supposed  predicament  in  which  S'unaMepa 
stands. 

*  Savitri  refers  S'unahsepa,  it  is  said,  to  Varum.  It  is  not 
very  obvious  why  any  comparison  should  be  instituted  between 
the  strength  and  prowess  of  Varima  and  of  birds. 


62  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

neither  do  these  waters,  that  flow  unceasingly,  nor 
(do  the  gales)  of  wind,  surpass  thy  speed. 

7.  The  regal  Varuna,  of  pure  vigour,  (abiding) 
in  the  baseless  (firmament),  sustains,  on  high,  a  heap 
of  light,  the  rays  (of  which) .  are  pointed  downwards, 
while  their  base  is  above.  May  they  become  con- 
centrated in  us,  as  the  sources  of  existence.'' 

8.  The  regal  Varuna,  verily,  made  wide  the  path 
of  the  sun," — (by  which)  to  travel  on  his  daily  course, 
— a  path  to  traverse  in  pathless  (space).  May  he  be 
the  repeller  of  every  afilicter  of  the  heart. 

9.  Thine,  0  king,  are  a  hundred  and  a  thousand 
medicaments.  May  thy  favour,  comprehensive  and 
profound,  be  (with  us).  Keep  afar  from  us  N'irriti,' 
with  unfriendly  looks ;  and  liberate  us  from  what- 
ever sin  we  may  have  committed. 


^  The  epithet  of  Rujd  is  here,  as  usual,  applied  to  Varuna ; 
and  it  may  be  either  radiant  or  regal :  but  the  latter  is,  in  general, 
the  more  suitable.  The  attributes  here  assigned  to  Varuna,  his 
abiding  in  the  antarihsha,  and  his  holding  a  bundle  of  rays, 
would  rather  identify  him  with  the  sun,  or,  at  least,  refer  to  him 
in  his  character  of  an  Aditya.  The  terms  of  the  original  are, 
however,  unusual ;  and  we  depend,  for  their  translation,  upon  the 
Scholiast  :  ahudhne,  in  the  baseless  ;  miilarahite  he  explains 
antariksJie,  in  the  sky  ;  and,  for  vanasya  stuj^am,  he  supplies 
tejasah,  of  radiance,  and  sangham,  a  heap. 

^  According  to  the  Commentator,  the  sun's  course  north  and 
south  of  the  equator  is  here  alluded  to.  He  docs  not  explain 
what  Varum  has  to  do  with  it. 

•^  According  to  Say  ana,  Nirriti  is  the  deity  of  sin,  Pupadevata. 
In  the  Nighaniu,  it  occurs  among  the  synonyms  of  earth. 


FIEST   ASHTAKA— SECOND    ADHYATA.  63 

10.  These  constellations,  placed  on  high,  which 
are  visible  by  night,  and  go  elsewhere  by  day,  are 
the  undisturbed  holy  acts  of  Yartjna  ;  (and,  by  his 
command,)  the  moon  moves,  resplendent,  by  night.'' 

11.  Praising  thee  with  (devout)  prayer,  I  implore   V'argaxv 
thee  for  that"  (life)  which  the  institutor  of  the  sacri- 
fice solicits  with  oblations.    Varuna,  undisdainful, 
bestow  a  thought  upon  us:  much-lauded,  take  not 

away  our  existence. 

12.  This  (thy  praise)  they  repeat  to  me  by  night 
and  by  day  :  this  knowledge  speaks  to  my  heart. 
May  he  whom  the  fettered  S'unahsepa  has  invoked, 
may  the  regal  Varuna,  set  us  free. 

13.  S'unahsepa,  seized  and  bound  to  the  three- 
footed  tree,''  has  invoked  the  son  of  Aditi.    May  the 

"■  Here,  again,  we  have  unusual  functions  ascribed  to  Varuna. 
The  constellations,  riksMh,  may  be  either,  it  is  said,  the  seven 
Rishis, — Ursa  Major, — or  the  constellations  generally.  They  and 
the  moon  are  said  to  be  the  pious  acts  of  Varutia  ( Varunasya  * 
vratuni)  ;  because  they  shine  by  his  command.  Eosen  detaches 
adahdhdni  *  vratdni  by  inserting  a  verb, — illasa  stmt  Fanmce  opera; 
but  Sdyana  expressly  terms  the  constellations  the  acts  of  Vanma, 
in  the  form  (or  effect)  of  the  appearance,  &c.,  of  the  asterisms. 
Varunasya  *  *  Icarmuiii  nahshatradarsanddirupdni. 

"  The  text  has  only  "I  ask  that ;"  the  Scholiast  supplies  life, 
tad  dyus.     The  addition  might  be  disputed ;  but  its  propriety  is 
confirmed  by  the  concluding  expression,  md  na  dyuh  jjra  moshih 
do  not  take  away  our  life. 

"  Trishu  drupadeshu.  JDrii,  Spds,  a  tree,  is,  here,  said  to  mean 
the  sacrificial  post,  a  sort  of  tripod.  Its  specification  is  consistent 
with  the  popular  legend. 


64  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

regal  Varuna,  wise  and  irresistible,  liberate  him ; 
may  he  let  loose  his  bonds. 

14.  Varfna,  we  deprecate  thy  wrath  with  pros- 
trations, with  sacrifices,  with  oblations.  Averter  of 
misfortune,''  wise  and  illustrious,  be  present  amongst 
us,  and  mitigate  the  evils  we  have  committed. 

16.  Yaruna,  loosen,  for  me,  the  upper,  the 
middle,  the  lower,  band."  So,  son  of  Aditi,  shall  we, 
through  faultlessness  in  thy  worship,  become  freed 
from  sin. 

SUKTA    II.    (XXV.) 

This  Hymn  is  addressed  by  S'uifAHsEPA  to  Vaktjna  :  the  metre 
is  Gayatri. 

Vargaxvi.  !•  Inasmuch  as  all  people  commit  errors,  so  do 
we,  divine  Yaruna,  daily  disfigure  thy  worship  by 
imperfections. 

2.  Make  us  not  the  objects  of  death,  through  thy 
fatal  indignation,  through  the  wrath  of  thee  so  dis- 
pleasured. 

*  The  text  has  asura,  which  is  interpreted  anisht'ahsliepana- 
s'lla,  accustomed  to  cast  off  what  is  undesired, — from  the  root  as, 
to  throw.  It  is  an  unusual  sense  of  the  word :  but  it  would 
scarcely  be  decorous  to  call  Variiiia  an  Asura. 

^  The  text  has  ud  uttamam  *  pdsam  *  *  adhamam  *  madhjamam 
srathdya,  loosen  the  upper,  lower,  and  middle,  bond;  meaning, 
according  to  Suyana,  the  ligature  fastening  the  head,  the  feet, 
and  the  waist.  The  result,  however,  is  not  loosening  from  actual 
bonds,  but  from  those  of  sin  :  anugasah  *  *  si/dnia,  may  we  be 
sinless. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  65 

3.  We  soothe  thy  mind,  Varuna,  by  our  praises, 
for  our  good ;  as  a  charioteer,  his  weary  steed. 

4.  My  tranquil  (meditations)  revert  to  the  desire 
of  life ; ""  as  birds  hover  around  their  nests. 

5.  When,  for  our  happiness,  shall  we  bring 
hither  Yaruna,  eminent  in  strength,  the  guide  (of 
men),  the  regarder  of  many  ?^- 

6.  Partake  (Mitra  and  Yaruna,)  of  the  common   vargaxvii. 
(oblation),  being  propitious  to  the  giver  and  cele- 

brator  of  this  pious  rite. 

7.  He,  who  knows  the  path  of  the  birds  flying 
through  the  air, — he,  abiding  in  the  ocean,  knows 
(also,)  the  course  of  ships.' 

8.  He,  who,  accepting  the  rites  (dedicated  to 
him),  knows  the  twelve  months  and  their  produc- 
tions, and  that  which  is  suppleraentarily  engen- 
dered;'^ 


*  Vasya-isht'aye.  Vasifah,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  is 
equivalent  to  vasumafah,  precious  ;  that  is,  jivanasya,  life,  under- 
stood. 

^  Uricchakshasam  is  explained  bahundm  drasMdram,  the  be- 
holder of  many- 

°  Here  we  have  the  usual  functions  of  Varuna  recognized. 

'^  Veda  ya  wpqjdyate,  who  knows  what  is  upa,  additionally,  or 
subordinately,  produced.  The  expression  is  obscure ;  but,  in  con- 
nexion with  the  preceding,  veda  mdso  *  divddasa,  who  knows  the 
twelve  months,  we  cannot  doubt  the  correctness  of  the  Scholiast's 
conclusion,  that  the  thirteenth,  the  supplementary,  or  intercalary, 
month  of  the  Hindu  luni-solar  year  is  alluded  to ;  "  that  thirteenth 
or  additional  month  which  is  produced  of  itself,  in  connexion  with 
the  year," — yas  trayodaso'' dhikamum  upajdyalc  aamvaUarammipe^ 


66  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

9.  He,  who  knows  the  path  of  the  vast,  the 
graceful,  and  the  excellent,  wind,  and  who  knows 
those  who  reside  above ; 

10.  He,  Yaruna,  the  accepter  of  holy  rites,  the 
doer  of  good  deeds,  has  sat  down,  amongst  the 
(divine)  progeny,''  to  exercise  supreme  dominion 
(over  them). 

Varga  XVIII.       11.  Through  him  the  sage  beholds  all  the  mar- 
vels that  have  been,  or  will  be,  wrought. 

12.  May  that  very  wise  son  of  Aditi  keep  us,  all 
our  days,  in  the  right  path,  and  prolong  oiu'  lives. 

13.  Varuna  clothes  his  well-nourished  (person), 
wearing  golden  armour,^  whence  the  (reflected)  rays 
are  spread  around ; — 

14.  A  divine  (being),  whom  enemies  dare  not  to 
offend,  nor  the  oppressors  of  mankind,  nor  the 
iniquitous,  (venture  to  displease) ; 

15.  Who  has  distributed  unlimited  food  to  man- 
kind, and,  especially,  to  us. 

swayam  evodpadyate.  The  passage  is  important,  as  indicating  the 
concurrent  use  of  the  lunar  and  solar  years  at  this  period,  and 
the  method  of  adjusting  the  one  to  the  other. 

"■  Ni  shasdda  *  *  pasty dsw  a.  The  commentator  explains  j9«s- 
tydsu,  daiv'isJiu  prajdsu,  divine  progeny ;  Rosen  translates  it,  inter 
homines ;  M.  Langlois,  au  sein  de  noa  demeures  ;  Dr.  Eoer,  among 
his  subjects.  The  sovereignty  of  Varuna,  sdmrdjya,  is  distinctly 
specified. 

^  Bihhrad  drdpim  hiranyayam,  that  is,  suvarnamayam  kavacham, 
armour  or  mail  made  of  gold.  This  looks  as  if  the  person  of 
Varum  were  represented  by  an  image.  The  same  may  be  said  of 
the  phraseology  of  v.  18. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA SECOND  ADHYAYA.  67 

16.  My  thoughts  ever  turn  back  to  him,  who  is   Vai-gaxix. 
beheld  of  many ;  as  the  kine  return  to  the  pastures. 

17.  Let  us,  together,  proclaim  that  my  offering 
has  been  prepared,  and  that  you,  as  if  the  offerer, 
accept  the  valued  (oblation). 

18.  I  have  seen  him  whose  appearance  is  grate- 
ful to  all :  I  have  beheld  his  chariot  upon  earth : 
he  has  accepted  these  my  praises. 

19.  Hear,  Varuna,  this  my  invocation:  make  us, 
this  day,  happ)^  I  have  appealed  to  thee,  hoping 
for  protection. 

20.  Thou,  who  art  possessed  of  wisdom,  shinest 
over  heaven  and  earth,  and  all  the  world.  Do  thou 
hear  and  reply  (to  my  prayers),  with  (promise  of) 
prosperity. 

21.  Loose  us  from  the  upper  bonds,  untie  the 
centre  and  the  lower,  that  we  may  live.^ 


Si5kta  III.  (XXVI). 

The  supposed   author  or  reciter  is  S'ujtahsepa,  as  before ;    the 
hymn  is  addressed  to  Agni  ;  the  metre  is  Gdyatr'i. 

1 .  Lord  of  sustenance,  assume  thy  vestments  (of    ^,      v^. 

'  •^  ^  Varga  XX. 

light),^  and  offer  this  our  sacrifice. 

2.  (Propitiated)    by   brilliant    strains,   do   thou. 


^  The  expressions  are,  for  the  most  part,  the  same  as  in  the 
concluding  verse  of  the  preceding  hymn  ;  but  it  ends  differently  : 
j'wasc,  to  live, — that  wc  may  live. 

"  The  text  has  only  rasirdm,  clothes ;  meaning,  the  Scholiast 
says,  (ichchhddakuni  tcjdnsi,  investing  radiance. 


68  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

ever-youthful   Agni,    selected   by  us,    become   our 
ministrant  priest,  (invested)  with  radiance. 

3.  Thou,  Agni,  art,  verily,  as  a  loving  father  to 
a  son,  as  a  kinsman  to  a  kinsman,  as  a  friend  to  a 
friend. 

4.  Let  Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Aryaman"  sit  down 
upon  our  sacred  grass,  as  they  did  at  the  sacrifice  of 
Manus." 

5.  Preceding  sacrificer,*^  be  pleased  with  this  our 
sacrifice,  and  with  our  friendship,  and  listen  to  these 
thy  praises. 

Vargaxxi.  6.  Whatever  we  ofi'er,  in  repeated  and  plentiful 
oblation,  to  any  other  deity  is,  assuredly,  ofi'ered  to 
thee. 

7.  May  the  lord  of  men,  the  sacrificing  priest, 
the  gracious,  the  chosen,  be  kind  to  us :  may  we, 
possessed  of  holy  fires,  be  loved  of  thee. 

8.  As  the  brilliant  (priests),  possessed  of  holy 
fires,  have  taken  charge  of  our  oblation,  so  we,  with 
holy  fires,  pray  to  thee. 

9.  Immortal  Agni,  may  the  praises  of  mankind 
be,  henceforth,  mutually  (the  sources  of  happiness) 
to  both,  (to  ourselves  and  to  thee). 

10.  Agni,  son  of  strength,"  (accept)  this  sacrifice, 


*  Aryaman  is  an  Aditya,  a  form  of  the  monthly  sun.  He  is 
said,  also,  to  preside  over  twilight. 

''  Ma7iushah,  of  Manus,  who,  the  Scholiast  says,  is  the  same  as 
Manu,  the  Prajdpati. 

"  F-krvyahotri ;  the  Hotri  born  before  us,  according  to  Suymia. 

^  Sahaso  yaho  ;  halasya  putrah,  son  of  strength.  The  epithet  is 
not  uufrequently  repeated,  and  is  sometimes  applied  to  Indra, 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  69 

and  this  our  praise,  with  all  thy  fires,  and  grant  us 
(abundant)  food. 


8UKTA  IV.  (XXVII.) 

The  Rishi,  divinity,  and  metre,  as  before,  except  in  the  last 
stanza,  in  which  the  metre  is  Trisht'uhh,  and  the  Viswadevas 
are  addressed. 

1.  (I  proceed)  to  address  thee,  the  sovereign  lord   vargaxxii. 
of  sacrifices,  with  praises ;  (for  thou  scatterest  our 

foes),  like  a  horse,  (who  brushes  off  flies  with)  his 
tail/ 

2.  May  he,  the  son  of  strength,  who  moves 
everywhere  fleetly,  be  propitious  to  us,  and  shower 
down  (blessings). 

3.  Do  thou,  Agni,  who  goest  everywhere,  ever 
protect  us,  whether  near  or  afar,  from  men  seeking 
to  do  us  injury. 

4.  Agni,  announce,  to  the  gods,  this  our  offering, 
and  these  our  newest  hymns." 

5.  Procure,  for  us,  the  food  that  is  in  heaven  and 
mid-air,  and  grant  us  the  wealth  that  is  on  earth.' 

also.  As  applicable  to  Agni,  it  is  said  to  allude  to  the  strength 
required  for  rubbing  the  sticks  together,  so  as  to  generate  fire. 

^  The  comparison  is  merely,  we  praise  thee  like  a  horse  with  a 
tail.     The  particulars  are  supplied  by  the  Scholiast. 

^  Gdijatram  navydnsam,  most  new  Gayatri  verses  j  showing 
the  more  recent  composition  of  this  Suhta. 

"  In  the  supreme,  in  the  middle,  and  of  the  end,  are  the  vague 
expressions  of  the  text :  their  local  appropriation  is  derived  from 
the  commentary. 


70  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

Varga  XXIII.  G.  Tliou,  Chiteabhantj,  '  art  the  distributor  of 
riches ;  as  the  waves  of  a  river  are  parted  by  inter- 
jacent (islets).  Thou  ever  pourest  (rewards)  upon 
the  giver  (of  oblations). 

7.  The  mortal  whom  thou,  Agxi,  protectest  in 
battle,  whom  thou  incitest  to  combat,  will  always 
command  (food). 

8.  No  one  will  ever  be  the  vanquisher  of  this  thy 
worshipper,  subduer  of  enemies ;  for  notorious  is 
his  prowess. 

0.  May  he,  who  is  worshipped  by  all  men,  convey 
us,  with  horses,  through  the  battle:  may  he,  (pro- 
pitiated) by  the  priests,  be  the  bestower  (of  boun- 
ties). 

10.  Jaeabodha,^  enter  into  the  oblation,  for  the 
completion  of  the  sacrifice  that  benefits  all  man- 
kind. The  worshipper  ofi'ers  agreeable  laudation  to 
the  terrible  (Agxi).^ 
Varga  XXIV.  11.  May  the  vast,  illimitable,  smoke-bannered, 
resplendent  Agni  be  pleased  with  our  rite,  and 
grant  us  food. 

12.  May  Agxi,  the  lord  of  men,  the  invoker  and 
messenger  of  the   gods,    the    brilliant-rayed,    hear 


^  A  common  denominative  of  Apri,  ho  who  has  wonclerfiJ  or 
various  lustre.  The  following  simile  is  very  clliptically  and  ob- 
scurely expressed ;  but  such  seems  to  be  its  purport,  according  to 
the  explanation  of  the  Scholiast. 

^  He  who  is  awakened  (hodha)  by  praise  {jura). 

'^  The  text  has  "  to  Rudra"  {Riidruya),  which  the  Scholiast  ex- 
plains "  to  the  fierce  or  cruel  Agni ;  "  krxirdydgnaye. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  71 

US,  with  our  hymns;  as  a  prince^   (listens  to  the 
bards). 

13.  Veneration  to  the  great  gods;  veneration  to 
the  lesser  ;  veneration  to  the  young  ;  veneration  to 
the  old !''  We  worship  (all)  the  gods,  as  well  as  we 
are  able.  May  I  not  omit  the  praise  of  the  elder 
divinities. 

SUKTA    V.    (XXVIII.) 

S'uNAHsEPA  is  the  Rishi :  the  metre  of  the  six  first  stanzas  is 
Anushtuhh;  of  the  three  last,  Gdyatr'i.  The  first  four  stanzas 
are  addressed  to  Indka  ;  the  two  next,  to  the  domestic  mortar ; 
the  next  two,  to  the  mortar  and  pestle  ;  and  the  ninth  is  of  a 
miscellaneous  appropriation,  either  to  Haeischandea,  (a  Pra- 
jdpati),  to  the  Adhishavaria  (or  the  efi'used  libation),  to  the  Soma 
juice,  or  to  the  skin  {cliarma)  on  which  it  is  poured. 

1.  Indra,  as  the  broad-based  stone"  is  raised  to    Vurgaxxv. 
express  the  Soma  juice,   recognize  and  partake  of 

the  effusions  of  the  mortar. 

2.  Indea,  (in  the  rite)  in  which  the  two  platters,'' 

"  "As  a  rich  man"  {revdn  iva)  is  the  whole  of  the  text.  The 
Commentator  suggests  all  the  rest  of  the  comparison. 

^  These  distinctions,  of  older  and  younger,  greater  and  lesser, 
gods,  are  nowhere  further  explained.  Sknahsepa,  it  is  said, 
worships  the  Viswadevas,  by  the  advice  of  Agni. 

•^  The  stone,  or,  rather,  here,  perhaps,  the  stone  pestle,  is  that 
which  is  used  to  bruise  the  Soma  plants,  and  so  express  the  juice. 
The  pestle  employed  in  bruising  or  threshing  grain  is,  usually,  of 
heavy  wood. 

''  Adhishavatlt/d,  two  shallow  plates  or  paterce,  for  receiving  and 
pouring  out  the  Soma  juice. 


79 


RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 


for  containing  the  juice, — as  (broad  as  a  woman's) 
hips, — are  employed,  recognize  and  partake  of  the 
effusions  of  the  mortar. 

3.  Indea,  (in  the  rite)  in  which  the  housewife 
repeats  egress  from  and  ingress  into  (the  sacrificial 
chamber),''  recognize  and  partake  of  the  effusions  of 
the  mortar. 

4.  When  they  bind  the  churning-staff  (with  a 
cord),''  like  reins  to  restrain  (a  horse),  Indra,  re- 
cognize and  partake  of  the  effusions  of  the  mortar. 

5.  If,  indeed,  0  Mortar,"  thou  art  present  in 
every  house,  give  forth  (in  this  rite,)  a  lusty  sound, 
like  the  drum  of  a  victorious  host. 

Varga  XXVI.  g^  Lord  of  the  forest,''  as  the  wind  gently  blows 
before  thee,  so  do  thou,  0  Mortar,  prepare  the 
Soma  juice,  for  the  beverage  of  Indra. 


^  The  Scholiast  explains  the  terms  of  the  text,  apachyava  and 
upachyava,  going  in  and  out  of  the  hall  (said) ;  but  it  should, 
perhaps,  rather  be,  moving  up  and  down,  with  reference  to  the 
action  of  the  jjestle. 

^  In  churning,  in  India,  the  stick  is  moved  by  a  rope  passed 
round  the  handle  of  it,  and  round  a  post,  planted  in  the  ground,  as 
a  pivot.  The  ends  of  the  rope  being  drawn  backwards  and  for- 
wards, by  the  hands  of  the  churner,  gives  the  stick  a  rotatory 
motion  amidst  the  milk,  and  thus  produces  the  separation  of  its 
component  parts. 

"  The  mortar  is,  usually,  a  heavy  wooden  vessel,  found  in  every 
farmer's  cottage.  According  to  Suyana,  it  is  the  divinities  pre- 
siding over  the  mortar  and  pestle,  not  the  implements  themselves, 
that  are  addressed. 

^  Vanaspati,  a  large  tree,  but,  in  this  verse,  put,  by  metonymy, 
for  the  mortar,  and,  in  verse  8,  for  the  mortar  and  pestle.  [See 
p.  33.] 


FIRST    ASHTAKA SECOND    ADHTAYA.  73 

7.  Implements  of  sacrifice,  bestowers  of  food, 
loud -sounding,  sport,  like  the  horses  of  Indra 
champing  the  grain.  • 

8.  Do  you  two  forest  lords,  of  pleasing  form, 
prepare,  with  agreeable  libations,  our  sweet  (Soma) 
juices,  for  Indra. 

9.  Bring  the  remains  of  the  Soma  juice  upon  the 
platters  ;  sprinkle  it  upon  the  blades  of  Kiisa  grass ; 
and  place  the  remainder  upon  the  cow-hide.'' 

SUKTA  VI.  (XXIX.) 

S'unahsepa''  continues  to  be  the  reciter :  the  deity  is  Indea  ;  the 
metre,  PanJdi. 

1.  Veracious  drinker  of  the  Soma  juice,  although  var<^axxvii. 


"  This  verse  is  addressed,  the  Scholiast  says,  to  Harischandra,  — 
either  the  ministering  priest,  or  a  certain  divinity  so  named :  no 
name  occurs  in  the  text.  It  is  not  very  clear  what  he  is  to  do. 
Apparently,  he  is  to  place  what  remains,  after  the  libation  has  been 
offered,  contained  in  pnUrm  or  platters,  upon  some  vessel, — the 
Scholiast  says,  upon  a  cart  {saliaiasyopari) — and,  having  brought 
it  away,  cast  it  upon  the  Pavitra,  which  is  explained,  in  the  com- 
ment on  the  Yajur-  Veda  Sanhitd,  to  mean  two  or  three  blades  of 
Kusa  grass,  serving  as  a  kind  of  filter, — typically,  if  not  effectively, 
— through  which  the  juice  falls  upon  a  sheet,  or  into  a  bag  of 
leather,  made  of  the  skin  of  the  cow  {gos  tivachi).  According  to 
Mr.  Stevenson,  the  Soma  juice,  after  expression,  is  filtered 
through  a  strainer  made  of  goat's  hair,  and  is  received  in  a  sort 
of  ewer,  the  dronalcalasa.  Here,  however,  the  directions  apply  to 
the  uchchhisht'a,  the  remainder,  or  leavings ;  such  being  the  term 
used  in  the  text. 

''  S'unahsejja  has  been  directed  by  the  Viswadevas,  it  is  said  in 
the  Brdhmaiia,  to  apply  to  Indra. 


74  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

we  be  unworthy,  do  thou,  Indra,  of  boundless 
wealth,  enrich  us  with  thousands  of  excellent  cows 
and  horses. 

2.  Thy  benevolence,  handsome^  and  mighty  lord 
of  food,  endures  for  ever.  Therefore,  Indra,  of 
boundless  wealth,  enrich  us  with  thousands  of  ex- 
cellent cows  and  horses. 

3.  Cast  asleep  (the  two  female  messengers  of 
Yama).  Looking  at  each  other,  let  them  sleep,  never 
waking.^  Indra,  of  boundless  wealth,  enrich  us 
with  thousands  of  excellent  cows  and  horses. 

4.  May  those  who  are  our  enemies  slumber,  and 
those,  0  hero,  who  are  our  friends,  be  awake. 
Indra,  of  boundless  wealth,  enrich  us  with  thou- 
sands of  excellent  cows  and  horses. 

5.  Indra,  destroy  this  ass,  (our  adversary),  prais- 
ing thee  with  such  discordant  speech ;'  and  do  thou, 
Indra,  of  boundless  wealth,  enrich  us  with  thou- 
sands of  excellent  cows  and  horses. 

■'  Siprin,  literally,  having  either  a  nose  or  a  lower  jaw  or  chin ; 
that  is,  having  a  handsome  prominent  nose  or  chin. 

''  The  text  is  very  elliptical  and  obscure.  It  is,  literally :  "Put  to 
sleep  the  two  reciprocally  looking  :  let  them  sleep,  not  being 
awakened."  That  two  females  arc  intended  is  inferrible  from 
the  epithets  being  in  the  dual  number  and  feminine  gender ;  and 
the  Scholiast  calls  them — upon  what  authority  is  not  stated — two 
female  messengers  of  Yama  :  Yamadutyau.  Mithudrisd  he  ex- 
plains mithmatayu  ytigalariipena  pasyata^  "looking,  after  the 
manner  of  twins,  at  each  other." 

'^  Nuvantam  papaydmuyd,  praising  with  this  speech,  that  is  of 
the  nature  of  abuse.      Ninddrupayd  vdchd  is  the  addition  of  the 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  75 

6.  Let  the  (adverse)  breeze,  with  crooked  course, 
alight  afar  off  on  the  forest.  Indra,  of  boundless 
wealth,  enrich  us  with  thousands  of  excellent  cows 
and  horses. 

7.  Destroy  every  one  that  reviles  us ;  slay  every 
one  that  does  us  injury.  Ijstdra,  of  boundless 
wealth,  enrich  us  with  thousands  of  excellent  cows 
and  horses. 

SdKTA    VII.    (XXX.) 

The  Hymn  is  ascribed  to  S'unahsepa  :  of  the  twenty-two  stanzas 
of  which  it  consists,  sixteen  arc  addressed  to  Indra  ;  three,  to 
the  A. s wins;  and  three,  to  Ushas,  or  the  personified  dawn. 
The  metre  is  Gdyatr'i,  except  in  verse  sixteen,  where  it  is 
Trisht'ahh. 

1.  Let  us,  who  are  desirous  of  food,  satisfy  this 
your  Indra,  who  is  mighty  and  of  a  hundred 
sacrifices,  with  drops  (of  Soma  juice) ;  as  a  well  (is 
filled  with  water). 

2.  May  he  who  is  (the  recii^ient)  of  a  hundred 
pure,  and  of  a  thousand  distilled,  (libations)  come 
(to  the  rite) ;  as  water,  to  low  (places). 

3.  All  which  (libations),  being  accumulated  for 
the  gratification  of  the  powerful  Indra,  are  con- 
tained in  his  belly  ;  as  water,  in  the  ocean. 

4.  This  libation  is  (prepared)  for  thee.  Thou 
approachest  it ;  as  a  pigeon  his  pregnant  (mate) :  for, 
on  that  account,  dost  thou  accept  our  prayer. 

5.  Hero,    Indra,  lord  of  affluence,    accepter   of 

Scholiast,  who  adds :  "  Therefore  is  he  called  an  ass,  as  braying 
or  uttering  harsh  sounds  intolerable  to  hear  ;"  Yathd  gardabhah 
srottim  asahjam  parusham  sahdam  karoti. 


Varga 

XXVI I  r. 


76  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

praise,  may  genuine  prosperity  be  (the  reward  of 
him)  who  offers  thee  laudation. 
Vargaxxix.       6.  Eiso  up,  S'atakeatu,  for  our  defence  in  this 
conflict.     We  will  talk  together  in  other  matters. 

7.  On  every  occasion,  in  every  engagement,  we 
invoke,  as  friends,  the  most  powerful  Indea,  for  our 
defence. 

8.  If  he  hear  our  invocation,  let  him,  indeed, 
come  to  us,  with  numerous  bounties,  and  with 
(abundant)  food. 

9.  I  invoke  the  man  (Indea,)  who  visits  many 
worshippers,  from  his  ancient  dwelling-place, — thee, 
Indea,  whom  my  father  formerly  invoked. 

10.  We  implore  thee,  as  our  friend,  who  art 
preferred  and  invoked  by  all,  (to  be  favourable)  to 
thy  worshippers,  protector  of  dwellings. 

Vargaxxx.  !!•  Drinker  of  the  Soma  juice,  wielder  of  the 
thunderbolt,  0  friend,  (bestow  upon)  us,  thy  friends, 
and  drinkers  of  the  Soma  juice,  (abundance  of  cows) 
with  projecting  jaws." 

12.  So  be  it,  drinker  of  the  Soma  juice,  wielder 
of  the  thunderbolt,  our  friend,  that  thou  wilt  do, 
through  thy  favour,  whatever  we  desire. 

13.  So,  Indea,  rejoicing  along  with  us,  we  may 
have  (abundant  food) ;  and  cows  may  be  ours,  robust, 
and  rich  in  milk,  with  which  we  may  be  happy. 


^  The  expression  in  the  text  is  iiprinindm,  gen.  plur.  of  the 
feminine  siprini,  having  a  nose  or  a  jaw.  It  cannot,  therefore,  refer 
to  the  previous  nouns  in  the  gen.  plur.,  somajydnidm  and  salch'i- 
ndm,  which  are  masc. ;  and  the  Scholiast,  therefore,  supplies  gavdm, 
of  cows,  and  adds  samuhah,  a  multitude,  or  herd. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA. — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  i  I 

14.  0  Dhrishnu,''  let  some  such  diYinitv  as 
thou  art,  self-presented,  promptly  bestow,  when 
solicited,  (bounties)  upon  thy  praisers;  as  (they  whirl) 
the  axle  of  the  wheels  (of  a  car).^ 

15.  Such  wealth,  S'atakratu,  as  thy  praisers 
desire,  thou  bestowest  upon  them ;  as  the  axle  (re- 
voIyos)  with  the  moYements  (of  the  waggon).'' 

16.  Indra  has  oYor  won  riches  (from  his  foes),  Vargaxxxi. 
with  his  champing,  neighing,  and  snorting  (steeds) : 

he,  the  abounding  in  acts,  the  bountiful,  has  giYcn 
us,  as  a  gift,  a  golden  chariot." 


*  The  resolute,  or  firm,  or  high-spirited, — an  appellative  of 
Indra. 

^  The  verse  is,  throughout,  very  elliptical  and  obscure,  and  is 
intelligible  only  through  the  liberal  additions  of  the  Scholiast. 
The  simile  is,  literally,  like  the  axle  of  two  cars, — ahsham  na  chak- 
Tijoli^  which  the  commentator  renders,  rathasya  chahratjoh,  of  the 
two  wheels  of  a  car,  and  adds  prakshi])anti,  they  cast,  or  turn  over. 
The  phrase  seems  to  have  puzzled  the  translators ;  Eosen  [_Adnota- 
tiones~\  has  currum  velui  duahus  rotis ;  Stevenson,  that  blessings  may 
come  round  to  them,  with  the  same  certainty  that  the  wheel  revolves 
round  the  axle ;  Dr.  Roer,  as  a  wheel  is  Irotight  to  a  chariot ;  M. 
Langlois,  que  les  autres  dieux,  *  *  non  moins  que  toi  sensihles  h  nos 
louanges,  soient  pour  nous  comme  I' axe  qui  soufient  et  fait  tourner  les 
roues  du  char.  The  meaning  intended,  is,  probably,  the  hope  that 
blessings  should  follow  praise,  as  the  pivot  on  which  they  revolve ; 
as  the  revolutions  of  the  wheels  of  a  car  turn  upon  the  axle. 

'^  This  repetition  of  the  comparison  is  more  obscure  than  in 
the  preceding  stanza.  It  is  like  the  axle,  by  the  acts, — aJcsham  na 
sachibhih.  The  Scholiast  defines  '  the  acts  '  the  movements  of  the 
car  or  waggon. 

''  So  the  Brnhmaiia.     By  Indra,  pleased,  a  golden  chariot  was 


78  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

17.  As  WINS,  come  hither,  with  viands  borne  on 
many  steeds.  Dasras,  (let  our  dwelling)  be  filled 
with  cattle  and  with  gold. 

18.  Dasras,  your  chariot,  harnessed  for  both  alike, 
is  imperishable :  it  travels.  As  wins,  through  the  air. 

19.  You  have  one  wheel  on  the  top  of  the  solid 
(mountain),  while  the  other  revolves  in  the  sky."* 

20.  UsHAS,^  who  art  pleased  by  praise,  what 
mortal  enjoy eth  thee,  immortal  ?  Whom,  mighty 
one,  dost  thou  affect  ? 

21.  Diff'usive,  many-tinted,  brilliant  (Ushas),  we 
know  not  (thy  limits),  whether  they  be  nigh,  or 
remote. 

22.  Daughter  of  heaven,^  approach,  with  these 
viands,  and  perpetuate  our  wealth.' 

given  to  him,  that  is,  to  Sknahsepa.  He,  nevertheless,  hands  him 
over  to  the  Aswins. 

'^  There  is  no  explanation  of  this  myth,  in  the  commentary.  It 
may  he  connected  with  the  Paurdnih  notion  of  the  single  wheel 
of  the  chariot  of  the  sun. —  Vishnu  Purdiia,  p.  217. 

''  The  dawn ;  daughter  of  the  personified  heaven,  or  its  deity, 
Dyiidevatdyd  duhitd.  Rosen  translates  the  name  Aurora  ;  hut  it 
seems  preferable  to  keep  the  original  denomination  ;  as,  except  in 
regard  to  time,  there  is  nothing  in  common  between  the  two.  In 
the  Vishnu  Purdna,  [but  see  new  edition,  Vol.  II.,  p.  249,  note  *] 
indeed,  Ushd,  a  word  of  similar  derivation  as  Ushas,  is  called  night ; 
and  the  dawn  is  Vyusht'a.  Several  passages  seem  to  indicate  that 
Ushd  or  Ushas  is  the  time  immediately  preceding  daybreak. 

•^  We  here  take  leave  of  Sunahsepa  ;  and,  it  must  be  confessed, 
that,  for  the  greater  part,  there  is,  in  the  hymns  ascribed  to  him, 
little  connexion  with  the  legend  narrated  in  the  Rdmdynna  and 
other  authorities. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA SECOND  ADHYAYA.  79 


ANUVAKA    VII. 

Si5kta   I.    (XXXI.) 

This  Hymn  is  addressed  to  Agni  ;  the  Rishi  is  Hieantasti^pa, 
the  son  of  Angieas.  The  eighth,  sixteenth,  and  eighteenth 
stanzas  are  in  the  Trisht'uhh  metre  ;   the  rest,  in  Jagat'i. 

1.  Thou,  Agni,  wast  the  first  Angiras  Rishi:''  avargaxxxii. 
divinityj    thou  wast    the   auspicious  friend  of  the 

deities.     In  thy  rite,  the  wise,  the  all-discerning, 
the  bright-weaponed  Maruts  were  engendered. 

2.  Thou,  Agni,  the  first  and  chiefest  Angiras, 
gracestthe  worship  of  the  gods ; — sapient,  manifold,'' 
for  the  benefit  of  all  the  world,  intelligent,  the 
offspring  of  two  mothers,'  and  reposing  in  various 
ways,  for  the  use  of  man. 

3.  Agni,  preeminent  over  the  wind,''  become 
manifest  to  the  worshipper,  in  approbation  of  his 
worship.    Heaven  and  earth  tremble  (at  thy  power). 

*  According  to  Say  ana,  he  was  the  first,  as  being  the  pro- 
genitor of  all  the  Angirasas ;  they  being,  according  to  the  Brdh- 
mana,  as  before  quoted,  nothing  more  than  the  coals  or  cinders  of 
the  sacrificial  fire.  There  is  no  explanation  of  the  origin  assigned, 
in  this  verse,  to  the  Maruts. 

"  Vihhu,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  means  "of  many  kinds;" 
alluding  to  the  different  fires  of  a  sacrifice. 

*=  Dwimdtd,  either  of  two  mothers,  i.e.,  the  two  sticks,  or,  the 
maker  of  two,  i.e.,  heaven  and  earth. 

**  Literally,  first  in,  or  on,  or  over,  the  wind, — prathavio  nidta- 
rikvane ;  alluding,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  to  the  iQui,  agnir 
rdi/ur  ddityah,  fire,  air,  sun, — in  which  Agni  precedes  Vdyu. 


80  RIG- VEDA  SANHITA. 

Thou  hast  sustained  the  burthen,  in  the  rite  for 
which  the  priest  was  appointed.  Thou,  Yasu,  hast 
worshipped  the  venerable  (gods). 

4.  Thou,  Agni,  hast  announced  heaven  to  Manu  :  ^ 
thou  hast  more  than  requited  Pururavas,^  doing 
homage  to  thee.  When  thou  art  set  free  by  the 
attrition  of  thy  parents,  they  bear  thee,  first,  to  the 
east,  then,  to  the  west,  (of  the  altar).'' 

5.  Thou,  Agni,  art  the  showerer  (of  desires),  the 
augmenter  of  the  prosperity  (of  thy  worshipper) : 
thou  art  to  be  called  upon,  as  the  ladle  is  lifted  up. 
Upon  him  who  fully  understands  the  invocation  and 
makes  the  oblation,'^  thou,  the  provider  of  sus- 
tenance, first  bestowest  light,  and,  then,  upon  all 
men. 

Varga  6.  Agni,  excellently  wise,  thou  directest  the  man 

who  follows  improper  paths,  to  acts  that  are  fitted 
to  reclaim  him ; — thou  who,  in  the  strife  of  heroes, 
(grateful  to  them)  as  widely-scattered  wealth,  de- 
stroyest,  in  the  combat,  the  mighty,  by  the  feeble. 

*  It  is  said  that  Agni  explained  to  Manu,  that  heaven  was  to 
be  gained  by  pious  works. 

^  The  agency  of  Pururaias,  the  sou  of  Biidha,  the  son  of  Soma, 
in  the  generation  of  fire  by  atti'ition,  and  its  employment  in  the 
form  of  three  sacrificial  fires,  as  told  in  the  Purdnas  {Vishnu 
Purdna,  p.  397),  may  be  here  alluded  to  :  but  the  phrase  is  only 
sukrite  sukrittarah,  doing  more  good  to  him  who  did  good. 

'^  The  fire  is  first  applied  to  kindle  the  Ahavanhja  fire,  and, 
then,  to  the  Gdrhapati/a,  according  to  the  Scholiast. 

*  He  who  knows  the  dhufi,  with  the  vashat'kriti,  or  utterance 
of  the  word  lasha  fat  the  moment  of  pouring  the  butter  on  thcvfire. 


XXXIII. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA SECOND    ADHYAYA.  81 

7.  Thou  sustainest,  Agni,  that  mortal  (who  wor- 
ships thee),  in  the  best  immortality,  by  daily  food : 
thou  bestowest  on  the  sage,  who  is  desirous  (of 
creatures)  of  both  kinds  of  birth, "*  happiness  and 
sustenance. 

8.  Agni,  who  art  praised,  by  us,  for  the  sake  of 
wealth,  render  illustrious  the  performer  of  the  rite. 
May  we  improve  the  act  by  a  new  offspring,  (given 
by  thee).  Preserve  us,  heaven  and  earth,  along 
with  the  gods. 

9.  Irreproachable  Agni,  a  vigilant  god  amongst 
the  gods,  (abiding)  in  the  proximity  of  (thy)  parents,^ 
and  bestowing  upon  us  embodied  (progeny),  awake 
us.  Be  well-disposed  to  the  offerer  of  the  oblation ; 
for  thou,  auspicious  Agni,  grantest  all  riches. 

10.  Thou,  Agni,  art  well-disposed  to  us;  thou  art 
our  protector ;  thou  art  the  giver  of  life  to  us :  we 
are  thy  kinsmen.  Uninjurable  Agni,  hundreds  and 
thousands  of  treasures  belong  to  thee,  who  art  the 
defender  of  pious  acts,  and  attended  by  good  men. 

11.  The   gods   formerly   made   thee,    Agni,    the      y^ro-a 
living  general  of  the  mortal  Nahusha  'J"  they  made     ^^^iv. 

^  It  is  not  very  clear  what  is  meant :  the  expression  is,  who  is 
very  desirous,  or  longing,  for  both  births.  The  Scholiast  says,  for 
the  acquirement  of  bipeds  and  quadrupeds, — dwipadam  chatush- 
paddm  Idhhdya. 

^  The  parents  are  here  said  to  be  heaven  and  earth. 

"  Nalmsha  was  the  son  of  A'l/us,  son  of  Pururavas,  who  was 
elevated  to  heaven,  as  an  Indra,  until  precipitated,  thence,  for  his 
arrogance.  The  circumstance  alluded  to  in  the  text  does  not 
appear  in  the  Faurdnik  narrative. —  Vishnu  Furdiia,  p.  413. 

10 


82  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

Ila  the  instructress  of  Manus,  wlien  the  son  of  my 
father  was  born.'' 

12.  Agni,  who  art  worthy  to  be  praised,  preserve 
us,  who  are  opulent,  with  thy  bounties,  and,  also,  the 
persons  (of  our  sons).  Thou  art  the  defender  of  cattle, 
for  the  son  of  my  sou,^  who  is  ever  assiduous  in  thy 
worship. 

13.  Thou,  four-eyed  Agni,'  blazest,— as  the  pro- 
tector of  the  worshipper, — who  art  at  hand,  for  the 
(security  of  the)  uninterrupted  (rite) :  thou  cherish- 


"  This  circumstance  is  not  related,  in  the  Purdnas,  of  lid,  the 
daughter  of  Vaivaswata  Manu. —  Vishnu  Furdna,  p.  349.  Frequent 
passages  in  the  Vedas  ascribe  to  lid  the  first  institution  of  the  rules 
of  performing  sacrifices.  Thus,  in  the  text,  she  is  termed  sdsani, 
which  the  Scholiast  explains  dharmopadesalcartr'i^  the  giver  of 
instruction  in  duty.  The  Taittir'iyas  are  quoted  for  the  text, 
"Ida,  the  daughter  of  Manu,  was  the  illustrator  of  sacrifice"  {t/aj- 
ndnuMsini) ;  and  the  Vdjasaney'ts,  for  the  passage :  * '  She  \_Ild, ]  said 
to  Ilanii,  'Appoint  me,  to  officiate  in  sacrifices,  principal  and  sup- 
plementary; for  by  me  shalt  thou  obtain  all  thy  desires'" — Prayd- 
jdnuydjdndm  madhye  mdm  avalcalpaya  mayd  sarvdn  avdpsyasi 
kdmdn.  M.  Burnouf  questions  if  lid  ever  occurs  in  the  sense  of 
daughter  of  Manu,  in  the  Vedas,  and  restricts  its  meaning  to 
*  earth'  or  to  'speech.'  The  passage  of  the  text,  Ildm  alcrinwan 
manusJiasya  sdsanim,  he  translates,  les  Bieux  ont  fait  d'' Ila  la  pre- 
ceptrice  de  Vhomme,  and  considers  it  equivalent  to  les  Dieux  ont 
fait  de  la  parole  V institutrice  de  Vhomme.  Introduction  to  the  Bhdga- 
vata  Pur  aria,  III.,  pp.  lxxxiv.-xci.  We  are  scarcely  yet  in  pos- 
session of  materials  to  come  to  a  safe  conclusion  on  this  subject. 

''  "We  must  conclude  that  this  hymn  was  composed  by  the 
author  in  his  old  age,  as  he  speaks  of  his  grandson. 

'^  Illuminating  the  four  cardinal  points. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SECOND   ADHYATA.  83 

est,  in  thy  mind,  the  prayer  of  thine  adorer,  who 
offers  the  oblation  to  thee,  the  harmless,  the  bene- 
volent. 

14.  Thou,  Agni,  desirest  (that  the  worshipper 
may  acquire)  that  excellent  wealth  which  is  requi- 
site for  the  many-commended  priest  :  thou  art 
called  the  well-intentioned  protector  of  the  wor- 
shipper, who  ever  needs  protection.  Thou,  who  art 
all-wise,  instructest  the  disciple,  and  (definest)  the 
points  of  the  horizon.'' 

15.  Agni,  thou  defendest  the  man  who  gives 
presents  (to  the  priests),  on  every  side,  like  well- 
stitched  armour.''  The  man  who  keeps  choice 
viands  in  his  dwelling,  and,  with  them,  entertains 
(his  guests),  performs  the  sacrifice  of  life,'  and  is  the 
likeness  of  heaven. 

^  This  is  said  to  allude  to  a  legend  in  which  the  gods,  intend- 
ing to  oflFer  a  sacrifice,  were  at  a  loss  to  determine  the  cardinal 
points,  until  the  perplexity  was  removed  by  Agnih  ascertaining 
the  south. 

^  Varma  *  syutam,  sewn  armour.  The  haraclia  was,  perhaps, 
a  quilted  jacket,  such  as  is  still  sometimes  worn :  the  Scholiast 
says,  formed  with  needles,  without  leaving  a  fi.ssure. 

"  The  expression  is  rather  ambiguous, — jivaydjam  yajate,  sacri- 
fices a  life-sacrifice.  Rosen  renders  it  vivani  hostiam  mactat; 
but,  in  this  place,  it  seems,  rather,  to  denote  an  offering  (food  and 
hospitality)  to  a  living  being,  the  nriyajyia,  worship  of  man,  of 
Manu.  The  expression,  however,  is  not  incompatible  with  the 
practice  of  killing  a  cow  for  the  food  of  a  guest,  thence  denomi- 
nated, as  M.  Langlois  remarks,  goyhna,  a  cow-slayer.  The  Scho- 
liast sanctions  either  sense,  explaining  the  plirase  QiihGV  j'lv ay ajana- 
mhitam  yajnam,  a  sacrifice  with  sacrifice  of  life,  or  J'wanishpddyam, 


84  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

Vargaxxxv.      16.  Agni,   forgivG  US    tliis  our  negligence,   this 

•  path  in  which  we  have  gone  astray.    Thou  art  to  be 

»         sought,  as   the  protector  and  encourager  of  those 

who  offer  suitable  libations  :  thou  art  the  fulfiller 

(of  the  end  of  rites) :  thou  makest  thyself  visible 

to''  mortals. 

17.  Pure  Agni,  who  goest  about  (to  receive 
oblations),  go,  in  thy  presence,  to  the  hall  of  sacri- 
fice, as  did  Manus,  and  Angiras,  and  Yayati,  and 
others  of  old."  Bring  hither  the  divine  personages  ; 
seat  them  on  the  sacred  grass ;  and  offer  them  grate- 
ful (sacrifice). 

18.  Agni,  do  thou  thrive  through  this  our  prayer, 
which  we  make  according  to  our  ability,  according 
to  our  knowledge.  Do  thou,  therefore,  lead  us  to 
opulence ;  and  endow  us  with  right  understanding, 
securing  (abundant)  food. 


Si5kta  II.  (XXXII.) 
TheEishi  and  metre  are  the  same :  the  Hymn  is  addressed  to  Indka. 
1.  I  declare  the  former  valorous  deeds  of  Indea, 

that  by  which  life  is  to  be  supported  :  he  also  explains  jwaydjam 
hjjivdh,  living,  priests,  who  ijyante  dakshindhldh,  are  worshipped 
by  gifts. 

"■  Riskikrit,  becoming  present  through  desire  for  the  offered 
oblation :  the  epithet  is  an  unusual  one. 

'^  In  like  manner  as  ancient  patriarchs, — such  as  Ifanu,  or  Ati- 
ffiras, — or  former  kings,  repaired  to  different  places  where  sacrifices 
were  celebrated.  Yayati  was  one  of  the  sons  of  Nahusha. —  Vishnu 
Pur  ana,  p.  413. 


XXXVI. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  85 

which  the  thunderer  has  achieved :  he  clove  the 
cloud ;  he  cast  the  waters  down  (to  earth) ;  he  broke 
(a  way)  for  the  torrents  of  the  mountain.^ 

2.  He  clove  the  cloud,  seeking  refuge  on  the 
mountain:  Twashtri  sharpened  his  far- whirling 
bolt:  the  flowing  waters  quickly  hastened  to  the 
ocean ;  like  cows  (hastening)  to  their  calves. 

3.  Impetuous  as  a  bull,  he  quaffed  the  Soma 
juice :  he  drank  of  the  libation  at  the  triple  sacri- 
fice.'' Maghavan  took  his  shaft,  the  thunderbolt, 
and,  with  it,  struck  the  first-born  of  the  clouds. 

4.  Inasmuch,  Indra,   as  thou   hast  divided  the 

^  In  this  and  subsequent  Suktas,  we  have  an  ample  elucidation 
of  the  original  purport  of  the  legend  of  Indra's  slaying  Vritra, 
converted,  by  the  PaurmWc  writers,  into  a  literal  contest  between 
Indm  and  an  Asum,  or  chief  of  the  Asuras,  from  what,  in  the 
Vedas,  is,  merely,  an  allegorical  narrative  of  the  production  of  rain. 
Vritra,  sometimes  also  named  Alii,  is  nothing  more  than  the 
accumulation  of  vapour  condensed,  or,  figuratively,  shut  up  in,  or 
obstructed  by,  a  cloud.  Indra,  with  his  thunderbolt,  or  atmo- 
spheric or  electrical  influence,  divides  the  aggregated  mass,  and 
vent  is  given  to  the  rain,  which  then  descends  upon  the  earth, 
and  moistens  the  fields,  or  passes  off"  in  rivers.  The  language  of 
the  Iliehas  is  not  always  sufiiciently  distinct,  and  confounds 
metaphorical  and  literal  representation ;  but  it  never  approximates 
to  that  unqualified  strain  of  personification,  which,  beginning, 
apparently,  with  the  Mahdhhdrata  {Vana-parva,  ch.  100  ;  also  in 
other  Parvas),  became  the  subject  of  extravagant  amplification 
by  the  compilers  of  the  Furdnas. 

^  At  the  Trilcadrulcas,  the  three  sacrifices  termed  Jijotish, 
Gaiih,  and  Ayu.  No  further  description  of  them  occurs  in  the 
commentary. 


88  EIG-VEDA    SANIIITA. 

first-born  of  the  cloi^ds,^  thou  liast  destroyed  the 
delusions  of  the  deluders ;  and,  then,  engendering 
the  sun,  the  dawn,  the  firmament,  thou  hast  not 
left  an  enemy  (to  oppose  thee).^ 

5.  With  his  vast  destroying  thunderbolt,  Indra 
struck  the  darkling  mutilated  Vritra.  As  the  trunks 
of  trees  are  felled  by  the  axe,  so  lies  Ahi,'  prostrate 
on  the  earth. 
xxxvn.  6.  The  arrogant  Vritra,  as  if  unequalled,  defied 
Indra,  the  mighty  hero,  the  destroyer  of  many,  the 
scatterer  of  foes ; — he  has  not  escaped  the  contact 
of  the  fate  of  (Indra's)  enemies.  The  foe  of  Indra 
has  crushed  the  (banks  of  the)  rivers.  ^ 

7.  Having    neither    hand    nor    foot,    he   defied 

*  The  first-formed  cloud. 

•*  By  scattering  the  clouds,  and  dispersing  the  darkness,  Indra 
may  be  said  to  be  the  parent  of  the  sun  and  daylight ;  leaving  no 
enemy,  that  is,  nothing  to  obscure  the  atmosphere. 

'^  We  have,  here,  and  in  other  verses,  both  names,  Ahi  and 
Vritra.  They  are,  both,  given  as  synonyms  of  megha,  a  cloud,  in 
the  Nighant'u.  The  former  is  derived  from  Jinn,  to  strike,  with  a 
prefixed,  arbitrarily  shortened  to  a :  the  latter,  lit.,  the  cncom- 
passer,  or  concealer,  is  from  rri,  to  enclose,  or  rrit,  to  be,  or  to 
exist,  or  from  vridh,  to  increase ;  a  choice  of  etymologies  inti- 
mating a  vague  use  of  the  term.  He  is  said  to  be  ryan^a,  having 
a  part,  or,  metaphorically,  a  limb,  detached ;  thus  confounding 
things  with  persons,  as  is  still  more  violently  done  in  a  following 
verse,  where  he  is  said  to  have  neither  hands  nor  feet. 

^  The  text  has  only  rtij'dndh  pipishe,  he  has  ground  the  rivers  : 
the  Commentator  supplies  "the  banks,"  which,  he  says,  were 
broken  down  by  the  fall  of  Vritra,  that  is,  by  the  inundation 
occasioned  by  the  descent  of  the  rain. 


FIRST    ASHTAKA SECOND    ADHYATA.  87 

Indea,  who  struck  him,  with  the  thunderbolt,  uj)on 
his  mountain -like  shoulder,  like  one  emasculated 
who  pretends  to  virility  :  then  Vritra,  mutilated 
of  many  members,  slept. 

8.  The  waters,  that  delight  the  minds  (of  men), 
flow  over  him,  recumbent  on  this  earth ;  as  a  river 
(bursts  through)  its  broken  (banks).  Ahi  has  been 
prostrated  beneath  the  feet  of  the  waters,  which 
Vritea,  by  his  might,  had  obstructed. 

9.  The  mother  of  Viiitea  was  bending  over  her 
son,  when  Ikdra  struck  her  nether  part  with  his 
shaft.  So  the  mother  was  above,  and  the  son  under- 
neath ;  and  Danu^  slept  (with  her  son),  like  a  cow 
with  its  calf. 

10.  The  waters  carry  off  the  nameless  body  of 
Yritra,  tossed  into  the  midst  of  the  never-stopping, 
never-resting  currents.  The  foe  of  Indea  has  slept 
through  a  long  darkness. 

11.  The  waters,  the  wives  of  the  destroyer,^ 
guarded  by  Ahi,  stood  obstructed,  like  the  cows  by 
Pani  :  but,  by  slaying  Vritra,  Indea  set  open  the 
cave  that  had  confined  them. 

12.  When  the  single  resplendent  Vritea  re- 
turned the  blow  (which  had  been  inflicted),  Indea, 
by  thy  thunderbolt,  thou  becamest  (furious),  like  a 


*  Ddnu  is  derived  from  do,  to  cut  or  destroy,  or  from  Danu,  the 
wife  of  Kasyapa,  and  mother  of  the  Ddnavas  or  Titans. 

^  Ddsapatnih.  JDdsa  is  said  to  be  a  name  of  Vritra,  as  the 
destroyer  of  all  things,  or  all  holy  acts, — he  who  ddsayati 
karmdni. 


XXXVIII. 


88  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

horse's  tail.''  Thou  hast  rescued  the  kine  ;  thou 
hast  won,  hero,  the  Soma  juice  ;^  thou  hast  let  loose 
the  seven  rivers  to  flow.° 

13.  l^either  the  lightning  nor  the  thunder  (dis- 
charged by  Yritra),  nor  the  rain  which  he  showered, 
nor  the  thunderbolt,  harmed  Indka,  when  he  and 
Ahi  contended,  and  Maghavan  triumphed,  also, 
over  other  (attacks). 

14.  When  fear'^  entered,  Indra,  into  thy  heart, 
when  about  to  slay  Ahi,  what  other  destroyer  of  him 

^  "We  have  had  this  simile  before ;  as  a  horse  lashes  his  tail,  to 
get  rid  of  the  flies. 

*•  Alluding,  it  is  said,  to  a  legend  of  Indra'' s  having  di'unk  a 
libation  prepared  by  Tivasht'ri,  after  the  death  of  his  son, — who, 
according  to  a  P^MrawiZ;  legend,  was  Tn'siras,  also  killed  hj  Indra, 
— and  to  avenge  which,  Vritra  was  created  by  TwasMri. 

'^  According  to  one  Pauranih  legend,  the  Ganges  divided,  on 
its  descent,  into  seven  streams,  termed  the  Nalini,  Pnvani,  and 
Hludini,  going  to  the  east ;  the  Chalishu,  S'ltd,  and  Sindhu,  to  the 
west ;  and  the  BMg'iratlu,  or  Ganges  proper,  to  the  south.  In 
one  place  in  the  Makdbhdrata,  the  seven  rivers  are  termed  Vas- 
wohasdra,  Nalin'i,  Pdvam,  Gangd,  S'ltd,  SindJtu,  and  Jamlunad'i;  in 
another,  Gangd,  Yamund,  Plahshagd,  RathastJid,  Sarayu,  Gomati, 
and  Gandah'i.  [See  the  Vishiu  Purdiia,  new  edition.  Vol.  II., 
pp.  120,  121,  and  notes.]  In  a  text  quoted  and  commented  on 
by  Ydska,  we  have  ten  rivers,  named  Gangd,  Yamund,  Saraswat'i, 
Sutudri,  ParusMi,  Asikm,  Marudvridhd,  Vitastd,  Arj'ih'igd,  and 
Susliomd.  Of  these,  the  Parushn'i  is  identified  with  the  Irdvat'i ; 
the  Arj'ikhjd  with  the  Vipds  ;  and  the  Susliomd,  with  the  Sindhu. 
— JVir.,  III.,  26.  The  original  enumeration  of  seven  appears  to  be 
that  which  has  given  rise  to  the  specifications  of  the  Purdnas. 

^  The  Scholiast  intimates,  that  this  fear  was,  the  uncertainty 
whether  he  should  destroy  Vritra,  or  not ;  but,  in  the  Purdnas, 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — THIRD   ADHYAYA.  89 

didst  thou  look  for,  that,  alarmed,  thou  didst  tra- 
verse ninety  and  nine  streams,  like  a  (swift)  hawk  ? 
15.  Then  Indra,  the  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt, 
became  the  sovereign  of  all  that  is  moveable  or  im- 
moveable, of  hornless  and  horned  cattle ;  and,  as  he 
abides  the  monarch  of  men,  he  comprehended  all 
things  (within  him) ;  as  the  circumference  compre- 
hends the  spokes  of  a  wheel. 


THIRD     ADHYAYA. 


ANUYAKA   YII,  (continued). 

Sl^KTA  III.  (XXXIII.) 

The  Rishi  is,   as  before,   Hieanyastupa.     Indra,   also,   is   the 
divinity  :  the  metre  is  TrisMuhh. 

1.  Come,  let  us  repair  to  Indea,^  (to  recover  our     vargai. 
stolen  cattle) ;  for  he,  devoid  of  malice,  exhilarates 
our   minds  :    thereupon    he   will    bestow   upon   us 
perfect  knowledge  of  this  wealth,  (which  consists) 
of  kine. 


Indra  is  represented  as  fearing  his  enemy's  prowess,  and  hidino- 
himself  in  a  lake.  Something  like  this  is,  also,  intimated  in  other 
passages  of  the  text ;  whence  the  Paurdiiik  fiction.  The  Bruh- 
mdfm  and  the  Taittir'iya  are  quoted,  as  stating  that  Indra,  after 
killing  Vritra,  thinking  he  had  committed  a  sin,  fled  to  a  great 
distance. 

^  This  is  all  the  text  says.  The  Scholiast  adds  :  "  The  gods  are 
supposed  to  say  this  to  one  tmother,  when  their  cows  have  been 
caiiied  off." 


90  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

2.  I  fly,  like  a  hawk  to  its  cherished  nest,  to  that 
Indra  who  is  to  be  invoked,  by  his  worshippers,  in 
battle;  glorifying,  with  excellent  hymns,  him  who 
is  invincible,  and  the  giver  of  wealth. 

3.  The  commander  of  the  whole  host  has  bound 
his  quiver  (on  his  back)  :  the  lord""  drives  the  cattle 
(to  the  dwelling)  of  vrhom  he  pleases.  Mighty 
Indra,  bestowing  upon  us  abundant  wealth,  take 
not  advantage  of  us,  like  a  dealer.^ 

4.  Yerily,  Indra,  thou  hast  slain  the  wealthy 
barbarian''  with  thine  adamantine  (bolt) ; — thou, 
singly  assailing  (him),  although  with  auxiliaries  (the 
Maruts,)  at  hand/  Perceiving  the  impending  mani- 
fold destructiveness  of  thy  bow,  they,  the  Sanakas/ 
the  neglecters  of  sacrifice,  perished. 

"•  Arya,  here  explained  sivdmin,  master,  owner,  lord, — mean- 
ing Indra. 

*"  Lit.,  do  not  be  to  us  a,  pant,  atraf3.cker;  such,  being  one  sense 
of  the  term ;  from  pana,  price,  hire.  Indra  is  solicited  not  to  make 
a  hard  bargain,  not  to  demand  too  much  from  his  worshippers. 

"  Vritra,  the  Dasxju,  literally,  a  robber,  but,  apparently,  used 
in  contrast  to  Arya,  as  if  intending  the  uncivilized  trilDes  of 
India.  He  is  called  wealthy,  because,  according  to  the  Vdjasaney'is, 
he  comprehends,  within  him,  all  gods,  all  knowledge,  all  obla- 
tions,—  Vritrasydntah  sarve  devdh  sarvds  cha  vidydh  sarvdni 
kavinshi  chdsan. 

^  So  the  Brdhmana.  The  Maruts  who  accompanied  Indra  did 
not  attack  Vritra ;  but  they  stood  nigh,  and  encouraged  the 
former,  saying,  "  Strike,  0  Lord  ;  show  thyself  a  hero." 

^  The  followers  of  Vritra  are  called  by  this  name,  the  meaning 
of  which  is  not  very  satisfactorily  explained  by  sandn  kdyanti, 
they  who  eulogize  benefactors.     They  are  also  called,  in  this  and 


FIRST   ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  91 

5.  The  neglecters  of  sacrifice,  contending  with 
the  sacrificers,  Indra,  fled,  with  averted  faces. 
Indra,  fierce,  unyielding,  lord  of  steeds,  (they  dis- 
appeared,) when  thou  didst  blow  the  disregarders  of 
religion  from  oif  the  heaven,  and  earth,  and  sky. 

6.  (The  adherents  of  Yritra)  encountered  the    Varga  ii. 
army  of  the  irreproachable  (Indra)  :  men  of  holy 

lives  encouraged  him.''  Scattered  before  him,  con- 
scious (of  their  inferiority),  like  the  emasculated 
contending  with  men,  they  fled  by  precipitous  paths. 

7.  Thou  hast  destroyed  them,  Indra,  whether 
weeping,  or  laughing,  on  the  furthest  verge  of  the 
sky;  thou  hast  consumed  the  robber,  (having 
dragged  him)  from  heaven,  and  hast  received  the 
praises  of  the  worshipper,  praising  thee  and  ofl'ering 
libations. 

8.  Decorated  with  gold  and  jewels,  they  were 
spreading  over  the  circuit  of  the  earth  ;  but,  mighty 
as  they  were,  they  triumphed  not  over  Indra  :  he 
dispersed  them  with  the  (rising)  sun.^ 

the  next  verse,  ayajwdnah,  non-sacrificers,  in  contrast  to  the  yaj- 
wunah  or  sacrificers ;  here,  apparently,  also  identifying  the  fol- 
lowers of  Vritra  with  races  who  had  not  adopted,  or  were  hostile 
to,  the  ritual  of  the  Vedas. 

^  Kshitayo  navagwdh,  men  whose  practices  were  commend- 
able. Or  the  'men,'  it  is  said,  may  be  the  Angirasas,  engaged  in 
offering  libations  to  Indra  for  nine  months,  in  order  to  give  him 
courage. 

"  We  revert,  here,  to  the  allegory.  The  followers  of  Vritra 
are,  here,  said  to  be  the  shades  of  night,  which  are  dispersed  by 
the  rising  of  the  sun:  according  to  the  Brdhmana,  "Verily,  the 
sun,  when  he  ri<?'^s  in  the  east,  drives  away  the  Hdkshasas.^' 


92  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

9.  Indra,  as  thou  enjoy  est  both,  heaven  and 
earth,  investing  the  universe  with  thy  magnitude, 
thou  hast  blown  away  the  robber  with  the  prayers 
which  are  repeated  on  behalf  of  those  who  do  not 
comprehend  them.'' 

10.  When  the  waters  descended  not  upon  the 
ends  of  the  earth,  and  overspread  not  that  giver  of 
affluence  with  its  productions,  then  Indra,  the 
showerer,  grasped  his  bolt,  and,  with  its  brightness, 
milked  out  the  waters  from  the  darkness. 

Varga  III.  11.  The  watcrs  flowed,  to  provide  the  food  of 
Indra  ;  but  (Vritra)  increased,  in  the  midst  of  the 
navigable  (rivers)  :  then  Indra,  with  his  fatal  and 
powerful  shaft,  slew  Vritra,  whose  thoughts  were 
ever  turned  towards  him. 

12.  Indra  set  free  (the  waters)  obstructed  by 
(Vritra),  when  sleeping  in  the  caverns  of  the  earth, 
and  slew  the  horned  dryer  up  (of  the  world).''   Thou, 

^  This  passage  is  rather  obscure,  owing  to  the  vague  purport 
of  the  preposition  abhi ;  amanyamdndn  ahhi  manyamdnair  Irah- 
mabhih,  "  with  prayers  to  be  understood  over  those  not  under- 
standing;" that  is,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  those  yajamdnas, 
or  institutors  of  sacrifices,  who  merely  repeat  the  mantras  without 
understanding  theii-  meaning,  are,  nevertheless,  to  be  protected  by, 
or  are  to  reap  the  benefit  of,  those  mantras ;  and  with  mantras,  or 
prayers  of  this  description,  Indra  is  to  be  animated,  or  empowered 
to  blow  away  or  scatter  the  followers  of  Vritra,  clouds  and  dark- 
ness. Eosen  renders  the  expression,  carminihus  respicientihus 
eos,  qui  hymnorum  tuorum  sensiun  vel  non  perspiciunt ;  M.  Langlois 
has  {excite)  contre  ces  mecrcants  par  nos  chants  respectueux. 

^  S'ringinam  *  susMam.  The  first,  literally,  having  horns,  the 
Scholiast  explains  "  furnished  with  weapons  like  the  horns  of  bulls 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHYATA.  93 

Maghavan,  with  equal  swiftness  and  strength,  didst 
kill,  with  thy  thunderbolt,  the  enemy  defying  thee 
to  battle. 

13.  The  weapon  of  Ixdra  fell  upon  his  adver- 
saries :  with  his  sharp  and  excellent  (shaft)  he 
destroyed  their  cities :  he  then  reached  Yritra  with 
his  thunderbolt,  and,  (by)  slaying  him,  exhilarated 
his  mind. 

14.  Thou,  Indra,  hast  protected  Kutsa,  grateful 
for  his  praises:  thou  hast  defended  the  excellent 
Dasadyu,  engaged  in  battle :  the  dust  of  thy  cour- 
ser's hoofs  ascended  to  heaven :  the  son  of  S'witra 
(through  thy  favour,)  rose  up,  to  be  again  upborne 
by  men.^ 

15.  Thou  hast  protected,  Maghavan,  the  ex- 
cellent son  of  S'witra,  when  combating  for  his 
lands,  and  encouraged,  (by  thee,)  when  immersed  in 
water.      Do   thou  inflict   sharp  pains  on  those  of 

and  buffaloes."  S\(shnam,  literally,  drying,  drying  up,  is  applied 
to  Vritra,  or  the  cloud,  as  witliholding  the  moisture  necessary  for 
fertility. 

*  Kutsa  is  said  to  be  a  Rishi,  founder  of  a  gotra,  a  religious 
family,  or  school,  and  is  elsewhere  spoken  of  as  the  particular 
friend  of  Indra,  or  even  as  his  son.  He  is  the  reputed  author  of 
several  hymns.  We  have  a  Purukutsa  in  the  Purdiias  ;  but  he 
■was  a  Rujd,  the  son  of  Mdndhdtri. —  Vishiiu  Purdna,  p.  363. 
[Also  see  below,  especially,  Vol.  III.,  p.  205,  note  1.]  Dasadyu 
is  also  called  a  Rishi ;  but  he  appears  to  have  been  a  warrior :  [see 
YI.,  XXVI.,  4  ?]  no  mention  of  him  is  found  in  the  Purdiias.  The 
same  may  be  said  of  S'waitreya,  or  S'lvitrya,  the  son  of  a  female 
termed  S'lvitru.  S'witrya  is  described,  in  the  next  stanza,  as  having 
hidden  himself  in  a  pool  of  water,  through  fear  of  his  enemies. 


94  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

hostile  minds,   who   have  long   stood  (in   enmity) 
against  us. 


Si5kta  IV.  (XXXIV.) 

The  Rishi  is  the  same ;  the  Hymn  is  addressed  to  the  Aswins  ; 
the  metre  is  Jagat'i,  except  in  the  ninth  and  twelfth  stanzas, 
in  which  it  is  TrisMulh. 

Varga  IV.  1.  Wise  AswiNS,  be  present  with  us  thrice  to- 
day/ Yast  is  your  vehicle,  as  well  as  your  munifi- 
cence :  your  union  is  like  that  of  the  shining  (day) 
and  dewy  (night).  (Suffer  yourselves)  to  be  detained 
by  the  learned  (priests). 

2.  Three  are  the  solid  (wheels)  of  your  abund- 
ance-bearing chariot,  as  all  (the  gods)  have  known 
(it  to  be),  when  attendant  on  Vena,  the  beloved  of 
Soma  :^  three  are  the  columns  placed  (above  it)  for 
support ;'  and,  in  it,  thrice  do  you  journey  by  night, 
and  thrice  by  day. 

"  AVe  have  a  variety  of  changes  rung,  in  this  hymn,  upon  the 
number  '  three.'  In  this  place,  allusion,  it  is  said,  is  made  either 
to  the  three  diurnal  sacrifices, — at  dawn,  mid-day,  and  sunset, — or 
to  the  faculty  of  all  divinities,  of  being  tripathaga'h,  or  going 
equally  through  the  heavens,  the  firmament,  and  the  earth. 

**  The  Aswins  are  said  to  have  filled  their  ratlia,  or  car,  with 
aU  sorts  of  good  things,  when  they  went  to  the  marriage  of  Vend 
with  Soma, — a  legend  not  found  in  the  Purdnas. 

'^  So  the  Scholiast  explains  skamhhusah  skahhitdsa  drabhe,  posts 
standing  up  from  the  body  of  the  car,  which  the  riders  may  lay 
hold  of,  if,  by  its  rapid  or  uneven  motion,  they  should  be  afraid  of 
falling  out. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHYAYA.  95 

3.  Thrice  in  one  entire  day  do  you  repair  the 
faults  (of  your  worshippers).  Thrice  to-  day  sprinkle 
the  oblation  with  sweetness  ;  and  thrice,  evening 
and  morning,  AswiNS,  grant  us  strength-bestowing 
food. 

4.  Thrice,  Aswins,  visit  our  dwelling,  and  the 
man  who  is  well-disposed  towards  us  :  thrice  repair 
to  him  who  deserves  your  protection,  and  instruct 
us  in  threefold  knowledge :  thrice  grant  us  gratify- 
ing (rewards) :  thrice  shoAver  upon  us  food,  as  (Indra 
pours  down)  rain. 

5.  AswiNS,  thrice  bestow  upon  us  riches :  thrice 
approach  the  divine  rite :  thrice  preserve  our  intel- 
lects :  thrice  grant  us  prosperity ;  thrice,  food.  The 
daughter  of  the  sun  has  ascended  your  three- 
wheeled  car. 

6.  Thrice  grant  us,  Aswins,  the  medicaments  of 
heaven,  and  those  of  earth,  and  those  of  the  firma- 
ment. Give  to  my  son  the  prosperity  of  S'anyu.^ 
Cherishers  of  wholesome  (herbs),  preserve  the  well- 
being  of  the  three  humours  (of  the  body).'' 

7.  Aswins,  who  are  to  be  thrice  worshipped,  day     Varga  v. 
by  day,  repose  on  the  triple  (couch  of)  sacred  grass 

upon  the  earth,  (that  forms  the  altar).     Car-borne 


*  S'anyu  is  said  to  be  the  son  of  Brihaspati,  brought  up  by  the 
Asmns. 

"  The  text  has  only  tridhdtu,  the  aggregate  of  three  humours, 
said,  by  the  Scholiast,  agreeably  to  medical  writers,  to  denote 
wind,  bile,  and  phlegm. 


96  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

Is'asatyas,''  repair,  from  afar,  to  the  threefold  (place 
of  sacrifice) ; "  as  the  vital  air,  to  (living)  bodies. 

8.  Come,  As  wins,  thrice,  with  the  seven  mother- 
streams/  The  three  rivers  are  ready  f  the  triple 
oblation  is  prepared.  Eising  above  the  three  worlds, 
you  defend  the  sun  in  the  sky,  who  is  established 
for  both  night  and  day." 

9.  Where,  Nasatyas,  are  the  three  wheels  of 
your  triangular  car?*^  Where,  the  three  fastenings 
and  props  (of  the  awning)  ?  When  will  be  the  har- 
nessing of  the  powerful  ass,*^  that  you  may  come  to 
the  sacrifice  ? 

10.  Come,  Nasatyas,  to  the  sacrifice.  The  obla- 
tion is  offered.     Drink  the  juice,  with  mouths  that 


^  They  in  whom  there  is  not  {na)  untruth  {asatya). 

^  The  text  has  only  "to  the  three:"  the  Scholiast  adds 
"altars,  severally  appropriated  to  oblations  of  ghee,  to  animal 
sacrifices,  and  to  libations  of  Soma," — aisJit'ihapdsulcasaumika- 
riifa  ved'ih. 

"  Gangd  and  the  other  rivers  are  here  considered  as  the  parents 
of  the  water  which  rolls  in  their  streams. 

'^  Three  sorts  of  jars,  or  pitchers,  used  to  contain  and  pour  out 
the  Soma  juice,  at  the  three  daily  sacrifices. 

®  Inasmuch  as  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun  indicate  the 
arrival  of  both  day  and  night.  In  what  way  the  Akoins  are  of 
service  to  the  luminary  docs  not  appear. 

^  The  apex  of  the  ear  is  in  front,  the  base  is  the  back  part, 
forming  three  angles.  Tlic  text  has  only  trivrito  rathasya,  which 
the  Scholiast  interprets  trisankhydlcair  a^rihhir  upetasya  *  rathasya. 

s  The  text  has  rdsabha,  a  synonym  of  gardalha,  an  ass. 
According  to  the  Nigliantu,  there  is  a  pair  of  them  :  Jtusabhdpas- 
winoli,  "  Two  asses  are  the  steeds  of  the  Aswins.'^ 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHYAYA.  97 

relish  the  sweet  savour.  Before  the  dawn,  even, 
Savitri  sends,  (to  bring  you)  to  the  rite,  your  won- 
derful car,  "^  shining  with  clarified  butter. 

11.  Come,  Nasatyas,  with  the  thrice  eleven  di- 
vinities : "  come,  Aswins,  to  drink  the  oblation. 
Prolong  our  lives ;  efface  our  faults  ;  restrain  our 
enemies ;  and  be  ever  with  us. 

12.  Borne  in  your  car  that  traverses  the  three 
worlds,  bring  to  us,  Aswins,  present  affluence, 
attended  by  (male)  progeny.  I  call  upon  you  both, 
listening  to  me,  for  protection.  Be  to  us  for  vigour 
in  battle. 

SuKTA  V.  (XXXV.) 
The  Rishi  is  the  same  :  the  first  and  ninth  verses  are  in  the  Jagat'i 
metre ;  the  rest,  in  the  TrisMuhh.     The  divinity  of  the  whole 
Hymn  is  Savitei  ;  but,  in  the  first  verse,  Agni,  Mitea,  Varuna, 
and  Night  are  included,  as  subordinate  or  associated  deities. 

1.  I  invoke  Agni  first,  for  protection :   I  invoke, 

for  protection,  Mitra  and  Varuna  :  I  invoke  Night,    ^^^'^^  ^^ 
who  brings  rest  to  the  world :  I  invoke  the  divine 
Savitri,  for  my  preservation. 

2.  Eevolving  through  the  darkened   firmament, 

*  Implying  that  the  Aswins  are  to  be  worshipped,  with  this 
hymn,  at  dawn. 

•'  This  is  authority  for  the  usual  Paurdnih  enumeration  of 
thirty-three  deities,  avowedly  resting  on  Vaidik  texts.  The  list  is, 
there,  made  up  of  the  eight  Vasus,  eleven  Ruclras,  twelve  Aditym, 
Prajdpati,  and  Vashat'hdra  {Vishnu  Purdna,  p.  123  and  note  27) : 
but  the  Scholiast  intimates  a  difierent  classification,  or  the  three- 
fold repetition  of  eleven  divinities,  agreeably  to  the  text :  "Ye 
eleven  deities,  who  are  in  heaven, —  Ye  devdso  divy  ekddasa  stha. 
[I.,  CXXXIX.,  11  :  see  Yol.  11,  p.  62.  J 

11 


98  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

arousing  mortal  and  immortal,  the  divine  Savitri 
travels  in  his  golden  chariot,  beholding  the  (several) 
worlds. 

3.  The  divine  Savitri  travels  by  an  upward  and 
by  a  downward  path : ''  deserving  adoration,  he 
journeys  with  two  white  horses:  he  comes  hither, 
from  a  distance,  removing  all  sins. 

4.  The  many-rayed  adorable  Savitri,  having 
power  (to  disperse)  darkness  from  the  world,  has 
mounted  his  nigh-standing  chariot,  decorated  with 
many  kinds  of  golden  ornaments,  and  furnished 
with  golden  yokes. 

5.  His  white-footed  coursers,"  harnessed  to  his 
car  with  a  golden  yoke,  have  manifested  light  to 
mankind.  Men  and  all  the  regions  are  ever  in  the 
presence  of  the  divine  Savitri. 

6.  Three  are  the  spheres :  two  are  in  the  prox- 
imity of  Savitri,  one  leads  men  to  the  dwelling 
of    Yama.''      The   immortal   (luminaries)'^    depend 

*  That  is,  ascending  from  sunrise  to  the  meridian,  and  then 
declining. 

^'  The  horses  of  Savitri  are  here  termed  sydva,  which, 
properly,  signifies  '  the  brown ;'  but,  in  verse  three,  they  have  been 
called  'white:'  the  present  must  be,  therefore,  a  proper  name, 
unless  the  hymner  contradicts  himself. 

•=  The  spheres  or  lolcas  which  lie  in  the  immediate  path  of  the 
sun  are  said  to  be  heaven  and  earth  :  the  intermediate  loha,  an- 
tarihsha,  or  firmament,  is  described  as  the  road  to  the  realm  of 
Yama,  the  ruler  of  the  dead,  by  which  the  pretdh,  or  ghosts, 
travel.  Why  this  should  not  be  considered  equally  the  course  of 
the  sun  is  not  very  obvious. 

"  The  text  has  only  amriid,  "  the  immortals : "  the  Scholiast 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHYAYA.  99 

upon  Savitri  ;  as  a  car,  upon  the  pin  of  the  axle. 
Let  him  who  knows  (the  greatness  of  Savitri) 
declare  it. 

7.  SuPARNA,"  (the  solar  ray),  deep-quivering,  life-    Varga  vii. 
bestowing,  well-directed,  has  illuminated  the  three 
regions.     Where,  now,  is  Surya  ?     Who  knows  to 

what  sphere  his  rays  have  extended? " 

8.  He  has  lighted  up  the  eight  points  of  the 
horizon,  the  three  regions  of  living  beings,  the  seven 
rivers.  May  the  golden-eyed  Savitri  come  hither, 
bestowing  upon  the  offerer  of  the  oblation  desirable 
riches. 

9.  The  golden-handed,  all-beholding  Savitri  tra- 
vels between  the  two  regions  of  heaven  and  earth, 
dispels  diseases,  approaches  the  sun,''  and  over- 
spreads the  sky  with  gloom,  alternating  radiance. 

10.  May  the  golden-handed,  life-bestowing,  well- 
guiding,  exhilarating,  and  afl9.uent  Savitri  be  pre- 
sent (at  the  sacrifice) ;  for  the  deity,  if  worshipped 

supplies  "the  moon  and  constellations,"  or,  in  another  accepta- 
tion, "the  rains;"  amrita  having,  for  one  meaning,  water. 

"  Suparna,  the  well-winged,  is,  in  the  Nighaiiiu,  a  synonym  of 
rasmi,  a  ray :  one  of  its  epithets,  asura,  is  here  explained  life- 
giving  ;  from  cmi,  vital  breath,  and  ra,  who  gives.  ' 

^  This  is  supposed  to  be  said  of  the  sun  before  dawn,  while  he 
is  absent. 

"  Veti  suryam  abhi.  The  Scholiast  endeavours  to  explain  this, 
by  observing,  that,  although  Savitri  and  Surya  are  the  same,  as 
regards  their  divinity,  yet  they  are  two  diiferent  forms,  and, 
therefore,  one  may  go  to  the  other  ;  yadyapi  savitrisiiryayor 
ehadevatdtwam  tathdpi  miirtibhedena  gantrigantavyahhdvah. 


100  EIG-VEDA   SANHITA, 

in  the  evening,  is  at  hand,  driving  away  Bdkshasas 
and  Ydtiidhdnas. 

11.  Thy  paths,  Savitei,  are  prepared  of  old,  are 
free  from  dust,  and  well-placed  in  the  firmament. 
(Coming)  by  those  paths,  easy  to  be  traversed,  pre- 
serve us  to-da}^     Deity,  speak  to  us. 

ANUVAKA  yill. 

Si5kta  I.  (XXXVI.) 

The  RisM  is  Kanwa,  son  of  Ghoea  :  the  deity  is  Agni,  identi- 
fied, in  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  stanzas,  with  the  Yupa, 
or  sacrificial  post.  The  metre  of  the  odd  verses  is  Brihati, 
having  twelve  syllables  in  the  third  pdda,  or  quarter  of  the 
stanza :  the  metre  of  the  even  verses  is  termed  Satohrihatiy 
having  the  first  and  third  pddas  equal. 

Varga  VTii.  1.  We  implore,  with  sacred  hymns,  the  mighty 
Agni, — whom  other  [BisJiis)  also  praise, — for  the 
benefit  of  you,  who  are  many  people,  worshipping 
the  gods. 

2.  Men  have  recourse  to  Agni,  the  augmenter 
of  vigour.  Offering  oblations,  we  worship  thee.  Do 
thou,  liberal  giver  of  food,  be  well-disposed  to  us, 
here,  this  day,  and  be  our  protector. 

3.  We  select  thee,  Agni,  the  messenger  and  in- 
voker  of  the  gods,  who  art  endowed  with  all  know- 
ledge. The  flames  of  thee,  who  art  miglity  and 
eternal,  spread  around  thy  rays,  touch  the  heavens. 

4.  The  deities  Yaruna,  Mitra,   and  Aryaman" 


"  Aryaman  is  here  explained,  he  who  measures  or  estimates 
properly  the  aryas,  arydn  mim'ite. 


FIEST   ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHYAYA.  101 

kindle  thee,  (their)  ancient  messenger.  The  man 
who  has  ofiPered  thee  (oblations)  obtains,  through 
thee,  Agni,  universal  wealth. 

5.  Thou,  Agni,  art  the  giver  of  delight,  the  in- 
voker   and   messenger   of  the  gods,'  the  domestic      \ 
guardian  of  mankind.    The   good  and  durable  ac-       \ 
tions  which  the  gods  perform  are,  all,  aggregated 

in  thee. 

6.  Youthful  and  auspicious  Agni,  whatever  obla-    Varga  ix. 
tion  may  be  presented  to  thee,  do  thou,  well-dis- 
posed towards  us,  either  now  or  at  any  other  time, 
convey  it  to  the  powerful  gods. 

7.  In  this  manner  the  devout  adore  thee,  who 
art  such  (as  described),  bright  with  thine  own 
radiance.     Men,   with   (seven)  ^  ministrant   priests, 

*  Rosen  lias  mcntms  hominum,  which  agrees  better  with  the 
order  of  the  text,  duto  visdm  asi:  but  Say  ana  connects  visum 
with  what,  in  the  original,  precedes,  grihapatih,  lord  of  the  dwell- 
ing, and  explains  dlita  by  devadkta. 

^  The  Scholiast  supplies  "the  seven."  According  to  another 
text,  sapta  hotrdh  2»'dch'ir  lashdtkurvanti,  the  seven  principal 
priests  pour  out  the  oblation.  According  to  Mr.  Stevenson,  the 
seven  priests  or  assistants  at  the  ^oma-ydga  are  : — 1.  The  institu- 
tor,  or  Tajamdna  ;  2.  The  Hotri,  who  repeats  the  hymns  of  the 
Rich;  3.  The  Udgdtri,  who  chants  the  Sdma ;  4.  The  Potri, 
who  prepares  the  materials  for  the  oblation  ;  5.  The  JVesht'ri,  who 
pours  it  on  the  fire ;  6.  The  Brahmd,  who  superintends  the 
whole  ;  and,  7.  The  Rakshas,  who  guards  the  door.  This  enume- 
ration omits  one  of  the  principal  performers,  the  Adhwaryu,  who 
recites  the  formulae  of  the  Tajush,  and  who  should,  probably, 
take  the  place  of  the  Tajamdna.  The  others,  except  the  last,  are, 
also,  included  among  the  sixteen  (see  p.  37,  note  b). 


102  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

kindle  Agni  (witli  oblations),  victorious  over  their 
enemies. 

8.  The  destroying  (deities,  along  with  thee,)  have 
slain  Vritra  :  they  have  made  earth,  and  heaven, 
and  the  firmament,  the  spacious  dwelling-place  (of 
living  creatures).  May  Agis^i,  possessed  of  wealth, 
when  invoked,  be  a  benefactor  to  Kanwa  ;  like  a 
horse  that  neighs  in  a  conflict  for  cattle.* 
.  9.  Take  your  seat,  Agni,  on  the  sacred  grass  ;  for 
thou  art  mighty.  Shine  forth  ;  for  thou  art  devoted 
to  the  gods.  Adorable  and  excellent  Agni,  emit  the 
moving  and  graceful  smoke. 

10.  Bearer  of  oblations,  (thou  art  he)  whom  the 
gods  detained  for  the  sake  of  Manu  ;  whom,  giver 
of  wealth,  Kanwa,  the  host  of  pious  guests,^  has 
detained ;  whom  Indea  detained ;  and  whom  (now,) 
some  other  worshipper  has  detained. 
Varga  X.  u.  xho  rays  of  that  Agni,  whom  Kanwa  made 
more  brilliant  than  the  sun,  preeminently  shine : 
him  do  these  our  hymns,  him  do  we,  extol. 

12.  Agni,  giver  of  food,  complete  our  treasures ; 
for  the  friendship  of  the  gods  is  obtainable  through 
thee.  Thou  art  lord  over  famous  viands.  Make  us 
happy  ;  for  thou  art  great. 


^  Krandacl  astvo  gavisht'ishu,  like  a  horse  making  a  noise  in 
wishes  for  cattle.  The  Scholiast  adds  sangrdmeshi,  in  battles, 
having,  for  their  object,  the  wish  to  wmcattle,—govishai/echchhdi/uk- 
tesJiu.     The  relation  of  the  simile  to  Agni  is  somewhat  obscure. 

''  Medhydtithi,  attended  by  venerable  {medhja)  guests  {atithi), 
is,  here,  an  epithet  of  Kanwa,  whose  son  has  been  before  intro- 
duced, as  Medhdtithi,  the  Rishioi\hQ  twelfth  and  following  Siiktas. 


FIEST   ASHTAKA — THIRD   ADHYAYA.  103 

13.  Stand  up  erect,  for  our  protection,  like  the 
divine  Savitri.  Erect,  thou  art  the  giver  of  food, 
for  which  we  invoke  thee  with  unguents,  and  priests, 
(offering  oblations).'' 

14.  Erect,  preserve  us,  by  knowledge,  from  sin: 
consume  every  malignant  spirit  :  raise  us  aloft, 
that  we  may  pass  (through  the  world)  ;  and,  that  we 
may.  live,  convey  our  wealth  (of  oblations)  to  the 
gods. 

15.  Youthful  and  most  resplendent  Agni,  pro- 
tect us  against  evil  spirits,  and  from  the  malevolent 
(man)  who  gives  no  gifts :  protect  us  from  noxious 
(animals),  and  from  those  who  seek  to  kill  us. 

16.  Agni,  with  the  burning  rays,  destroy  entirely    Varga  xr. 
our  foes,  who  make  no  gifts,  as  (potters'  ware,)  with 

a  club : ''  let  not  one  who  is  inimical  to  us,  nor  the 
man  who  attacks  us  with  sharp  weapons,  prevail 
against  us. 

17.  Agni  is  solicited  for  power-conferring  (afflu- 
ence) :  he  has  granted  prosperity  to  Kanwa  ;  he  has 
protected  our  friends,  as  well  as  the  (sage  who  was) 
the  host  of  the  holy,  and  (every  other)  worshipper 
(who  has  had  recourse  to  him)  for  riches. 

18.  We  invoke,  from  afar,  along  with  Agni,  Tur- 


'^  Agni,  as  erect,  is  here  said  to  be  identified  with  the  yupa  or 
post  to  which  the  victims,  at  a  sacrifice  of  animals,  are  bound  ; 
and,  according  to  Akvaldyana,  this  and  the  next  verse  are  to  be 
recited,  on  such  occasions,  at  the  time  of  setting  up  the  post. 

^  The  text  has  only  ghand,  with  a  club  :  the  Scholiast  adds 
"the  pottery,"  bhdnMdi. 


104  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

VASA,  Yadu,  and  Ugradeva.    Let  Agni,  the  arrester 
of  the  robber,  bring  hither  Navavastwa,  Brihad- 

RATHA,  and  TURVITI.'' 

19.  Manu  detained  thee,  Agni,  (to  give)  light  to 
the  various  races  of  mankind.  Born  for  the  sake  of 
sacrifice,  and  satiated  with  oblations,  thou,  whom 
men  reverence,  hast  blazed  for  Kanwa. 

20.  The  flames  of  Agni  are  luminous,  powerful, 
fearful,  and  not  to  be  trusted.  Ever,  assuredly  and 
entirely,  consume  the  mighty  spirits  of  evil,  and  all 
our  other  adversaries. 

Si5kta  II.  (XXXVII.) 

The  Rishi  is  Kanwa;  the  Hymn  is  addressed  to  the  Marfts  ; 
I  the  metre  is  Gdyatr'i. 

Varga  XII.  1.  Celebrate,  Kanwas,^  the  aggregate  strength  of 
the  Maruts,  sportive,  without  horses,^  but  shining 
in  their  car ; 


^  Nothing  more  is  said,  of  the  persons  named  in  this  verse,  than 
that  they  were  Rdjarshis,  royal  sages.  [See  p,  149,  and  Yols. 
II.,  III.,  lY.,  passim.']  Turvasa  may  be  another  reading  of 
Turvasu,  who,  with  Yadu,  was  a  son  of  Yaydti,  of  the  lunar 
race.  We  have  several  princes,  in  the  Purdiias,  of  the  name  of 
Brihadratha ;  but  the  others  are,  exclusively,  Vaidih. 

^  Kanwas  may  mean  either  the  members  of  the  goira  (the 
family,  or  school)  of  Kanwa,  or,  simply,  sages  or  priests. 

'^  The  phrase  is  anarvdnam,  which  the  Scholiast  explains, 
hhrdtrivyarahitam,  literally,  without  a  brother's  son,  which  would 
be  a  very  unintelligible  epithet.  Arvan  is,  in  its  usual  accepta- 
tion, a  horse  ;  and  being  without  horses  would  not  be  inapplicable 
to  the  Maruts,  whose  chariot  is  drawn  by  deer.  Bhrdtrivya  has, 
for  one  sense,  that  of  enemy ;  whence  Eosen  renders  the  expression 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHYAYA.  105 

2.  Who,  borne  by  spotted  deer,  were  born  self- 
radiant,  with  weapons,  war-cries,''  and  decorations. 

3.  I  hear  the  cracking  of  the  whips  in  their 
hands,  wonderfully  inspiring  (courage)  in  the  fight. 

4.  Address  the  god-given  prayer"  to  those  who  are 
your  strength,  the  destroyers  of  foes,  the  powerful, 
possessed  of  brilliant  reputation. 

5.  Praise  the  sportive  and  resistless  might  of  the 
Maruts,  who  were  born  amongst  kine/  and  whose 
strength  has  been  nourished  by  (the  enjoyment  of) 
the  milk.'' 

6.  Which   is   chief    leader   among    you,    agita-  VargaXiii. 

of  the  text,  hostiwn  immunem,  and  M.  Langlois,  inattaqiiable  :  but 
it  is  doubtful  if  arvan  can  admit  of  such  an  interpretation. 

^  Vds'ibhih,  with  sounds,  or  speeches ;  i.e.,  according  to  the 
Scholiast,  with  cries  terrifying  the  enemy's  army.  Vast  is  a  syno- 
nym of  vdch,  speech,  voice,  in  the  Nighant'u. 

^  JDevattam  brahma,  the  praise  or  prayer  which  recommends 
the  oblation,  obtained  from  the  ^avour  or  instruction  of  the  gods. 

'^  The  text  has  (joshu  *  Murutain,  the  tribe  of  Maruts  among  the 
cows.  Another  text  is  cited,  which  says  the  Maruts  were  born  of 
milk,  for  Frisni, — Prisni)jai  vai  payaso  Maruto  jdtdh. 

**  The  passage  is  brief  and  obscure, — janibhe  rasasya  vdvridhe, 
which  is  explained,  their  vigour,  derived  from  or  of  the  milk, 
was  increased  (either)  in  enjoyment  or  in  the  belly, — gohsMraru- 
pasya  sambandlii  tat  tcjo  jamhlie  suhha  tulare  vd  *  vriddham  alhut. 
Kosen  renders  it,  in  utero  lactis  vires  augentur ;  M.  Langlois  has 
qui  regne  au  milieii,  des  vaches  {celestes),  et  ouvre  avec  force  {lears 
mamelles  pour  en  faire  couler)  le  lait.  The  cows  he  considers  the 
clouds ;  and  the  milk,  the  rain  :  but  it  is  the  sardhas,  the  tejas,  the 
vigour,  or  strength,  of  the  Maruts,  which  has  been  augmented  in  or 
by,  not  exerted  upon,  the  ram,  or  milk. 


106  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

tors  of  heaven  and  earth,  who  shake  all  around,  like 
the  top  (of  a  tree)  ? 

7.  The  householder,  in  dread  of  your  fierce  and 
violent  approach,  has  planted''  a  firm  (buttress) ;  for 
the  many-ridged  mountain  is  shattered  (before  you), 

8.  At  whose  impetuous  approach  earth  trembles ; 
like  an  enfeebled  monarch,  through  dread  (of  his 
enemies). 

9.  Stable  is  their  birth-place,  (the  sky) ;  yet  the 
birds  (are  able)  to  issue  from  (the  sphere  of)  their 
parent :  for  your  strength  is  everywhere  (divided) 
between  two  (regions, — or,  heaven  and  earth). 

10.  They  are  the  generators  of  speech  :  they 
spread  out  the  waters,  in  their  courses :  they  urge 
the  lowing  (cattle)  to  enter  (the  water),  up  to  their 
knees,  (to  drink). 

Varga  XIV         11.  They  drive,  before  them,  in  their  course,  the 
long,  vast,  uninjurable,  rain-retaining  cloud. 

12.  Marijts,  as  you  have  vigour,  invigorate  man- 
kind :  give  animation  to  the  clouds. 

13.  Wherever  the  Maruts  pass,  they  fill  the  way 
with  clamour :  every  one  hears  their  (noise). 

14.  Come  quickly,  with  your  swift  (vehicles). 
The  offerings  of  the  Kanwas  are  prepared.  Be 
pleased  with  them. 

15.  The  offering  is  prepared  for  your  gratifica- 

*  The  text  has  only  mdnusJio  dadhre,  the  man  has  planted :  the 
Scholiast  explains  the  former,  grihasivum'i,  the  master  of  the  house, 
and  adds,  to  the  latter,  grihadddhjdrtham  dridham  stambham, 
a  strong  post,  to  give  stability  to  the  dwelling. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA— THIRD    ADHYAYA.  107 

tion  :  we  are  your  (worshippers),  that  we  may  live 
all  our  life. 

SUKTA  III.  (XXXYIII.) 

The  Rishi,  deities,  and  metre  continue  the  same. 

1.  Maruts,  who  are  fond  of  praise,  and  for  whom  VargaXv. 
the  sacred  grass  is  trimmed,  when  will  you  take  us 

by  both  hands,  as  a  father  does  his  son  ? 

2.  Where,  indeed,  are  you  (at  present)  ?  When 
will  your  arrival  take  place  ?  Pass  from  the  heaven, 
not  from  the  earth.  Where  do  they  (who  worship 
you)  cry  (to  you,)  like  cattle  ? 

3.  Where,  Martjts,  are  your  new  treasures  ? 
Where,  your  valuable  (riches)  ?  Where,  all  your 
auspicious  (gifts)  ?"" 

4.  That  you,  sons  of  Prisni,^  may  become  mor- 
tals, and  your  panegyrist,  become  immortal. 

5.  Never  may  your  worshipper  be  indifferent  to 
you, — as  a  deer  (is  never  indifferent)  to  pasture, — 
so  that  he  may  not  tread  the  path  of  Yama. 

6.  Let  not  the  most  powerful  and  indestructible    Vargaxvi. 
NiRRiTi*"  destroy  us  :  let  him  perish,  with  our  (evil) 
desires. 

7.  In  truth,  the  brilliant  and  vigorous  Maruts, 

*  The  expressions  of  the  text,  smrmd,  suvitd,  and  sauhhagd,  are 
said  to  imply,  severally,  offspring  and  cattle,  jewels  and  gold,  and 
horses,  elephants,  and  the  like. 

^  Prisnimdtarah,  as  we  have  had  before  (p.  56,  note  b) :  but 
Prisni  is  here  explained,  by  the  Scholiast,  by  dhenu,  a  milch-cow. 

°  He  is,  here,  called  a  divinity  of  the  Rdkshasa  race  (see  p. 
62,  note.)     [Also  see  Vol.  III.,  p.  123,  note  2]. 


108  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

cherislied  by  Eudra,*  send  down  rain,  without  wind, 
upon  the  desert. 

8.  The  lightning  roars, — like  a  parent  cow  that 
bellows  for  its  calf, — and,  hence,  the  rain  is  set  free 
by  the  Maruts. 

9.  They  spread  darkness  over  the  day,  by  a  water- 
bearing cloud,  and,  thence,  inundate  the  earth. 

10.  At  the  roaring  of  the  Maruts,  every  dwelling 
of  earth  (shakes),  and  men,  also,  tremble. 

Varga  XVII.  11.  Maruts,  witli  stroug  hauds,  come  along  the 
beautifully-embanked  rivers,  with  unobstructed  pro- 
gress. 

12.  May  the  felloes  of  your  wheels  be  firm  ;  may 
your  cars  and  their  steeds  be  steady,  and  your 
fingers  well- skilled  (to  hold  the  reins). 

13.  Declare,  in  our  presence,  (priests,)  with  voice 
attuned  to  praise,  Brahmanaspati,"  Agni,  and  the 
beautiful  Mitra. 

14.  Utter  the  verse  that  is  in  your  mouths; 
spread  it  out,  like  a  cloud  spreading  rain  :  chant 
the  measured  hymn. 

16.  Glorify  the  host  of  Maruts,  brilliant,  de- 
serving of  praise,  entitled  to  adoration :  may  they 
be  exalted  by  this  our  worship. 


^  Rudriyusah  ;  i.e.,  Rudrasyeme,  those  who  are  of,  or  belonging 
to,  Rudra  ;  explained,  Rudreiia  pdlitdh,  cherished  or  protected  by 
Rudra ;  for  the  explanation  of  which,  reference  is  made  to  the 
dhhydnas,  tales  or  traditions.  There  is  no  connexion  between 
Rudra  and  the  Maruts,  in  the  Purdnas. 

**  The  lord  of  the  mantra  (or  prayer),  or  of  the  sacrificial  food. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHTATA.  109 


Si5kta  IV.  (XXXIX.) 

The  Rishi  and  deities  are  the  same  :  the  metre  is  Brihat'i,  in  the 
odd  verses ;  Satolrihati,  in  the  even. 

1.  When,  Maeuts,  who  make  (all  things)  tremble,  Vargaxviii. 
you  direct  your  awful  (vigour)  downwards,   from 

afar,  as  light  (descends  from  heaven),  by  whose  wor- 
ship, by  whose  praise,  (are  you  attracted)  ?  To  what 
(place  of  sacrifice),  to  whom,  indeed,  do  you  repair  ? 

2.  Strong  be  your  weapons  for  driving  away 
(your)  foes,  firm  in  resisting  them:  yours  be  the 
strength  that  merits  praise,  not  (the  strength)  of  a 
treacherous  mortal. 

3.  Directing  Maruts,  when  you  demolish  what 
is  stable,  when  you  scatter  what  is  ponderous,  then 
you  make  your  way  through  the  forest  (trees)  of 
earth,  and  the  defiles  of  the  mountains. 

4.  Destroyers  of  foes,  no  adversary  of  yours  is 
known  above  the  heavens,  nor  (is  any)  upon  earth. 
May  your  collective  strength  be  quickly  exerted, 
sons  of  EuDRA,'*  to  humble  (your  enemies). 

5.  They  make  the  mountains  tremble ;  they  drive 
apart  the  forest-trees.  Go,  divine  Maruts,  whither 
you  will,  with  all  your  progeny,  like  those  intoxi- 
cated. 

6.  You  have  harnessed  the  spotted  deer  to  your 

.  ^  ''  Varga  XIX. 

chariot :  the  red  deer,  ,yoked  between  them,  (aids  to) 


"*  RudrdsaJi;  i.e.,  Rudraputrdh,  sons  of  Rudra;  figuratively, 
perhaps,  as  having  been  protected  by  him,  as  intimated  in  the 
preceding  hymn. 


110  KIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

drag    the    car-/    the  firmament    listens   for    your 
coming ;    and  men  are  alarmed. 

7.  EuDEAS,  we  have  recourse  to  your  assistance, 
for  the  sake  of  our  progeny.  Come,  quickly,  to  the 
timid  Xanwa,  as  you  formerly  came,  for  our  pro- 
tection. 

8.  Should  any  adversary,  instigated  by  you,  or  by 
man,  assail  us,  withhold  from  him  food,  and  strength, 
and  your  assistance. 

9.  Prachetasas,^  who  are  to  be  unreservedly 
worshipped,  uphold  (the  sacrificer)  Kanwa  :  come  to 
us,  Maruts,  with  undivided  protective  assistances; 
as  the  lightnings  (bring)  the  rain. 

10.  Bounteous  givers,  you  enjoy  unimpaired 
vigour:  shakers  (of  the  earth),  you  possess  undi- 
minished strength  :  Maruts,  let  loose  your  auger, 
like  an  arrow,  upon  the  wrathful  enemy  of  the 
Rishis. 


'^  The  spotted  deer,  prishat'ih,  are  always  specified  as  the  steeds 
of  the  Maruts.  We  then  have,  in  the  text,  prashiir  vahati  rohitah. 
Prasld'i  is  said  to  he  a  sort  of  yoke,  in  the  middle  of  three  horses, 
or  other  animals,  harnessed  in  a  car :  but  the  word  stands  alone, 
without  any  grammatical  concord ;  and  it  does  not  appear  what  is 
to  be  done  with  the  yoke.  Rohita,  the  Scholiast  says,  is  another 
kind  of  deer,  the  red  deer,  who,  vahati,  bears  or  drags  the  car, 
ratham  nayati.  The  sense  may  be  something  like  that  which  is 
given  in  the  translation  ;  but  the  construction  of  the  original  is 
obscure,  and,  apparently,  rude  and  ungrammatical, 

*"  Or  the  appellative  may  be  an  epithet  only,  implying  those 
possessed  of  superior  {pra)  intellect  {chetaa). 


FIRST  ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHYATA.  Ill 


SdKTA   V.    (XL.) 

The  deity  is  Beahmanaspati  ;  the  Rishi  is,  still,  K.'Vnwa  ;  the 
metre,  the  same  as  in  the  preceding. 

1.  Else   up,   Brahmanaspati/    Devoted  to   the    Varga  xx. 
gods,  we  solicit  thee.     Bounteous  Maruts,  be  nigh 

at  hand :  Indra,  be  a  partaker  of  the  libation. 

2.  Man  celebrates  thee,  son  of  strength,''  for  the 
wealth  abandoned  (by  the  foe).  Maruts,  may  he 
who  praises  you  obtain  wealth,  yielding  excellent 
steeds  and  eminent  vigour. 

3.  May  Brahmanaspati  approach  us:  may  the 
goddess,  speaker  of  truth,'  approach  us :  may  the 
gods  (drive  away)  every  adversary,  and,  present, 
conduct  us  to  the  sacrifice  which  is  beneficial  to 
man,  and  (abounds)  with  respectably-presented 
offerings. 

4.  He  who   presents   to   the   ministrant  (priest) 

'^  In  a  former  passage,  Brahmanaspati  appeared  as  a  form  of 
Agni  (p.  41,  note);  in  this  hymn,  he  is  associated  with  the 
Maruts,  although  Indra  is,  also,  separately  named. 

^  Sahasasputra.  Similar  epithets,  as  sahaso  yaho  and  sunuh 
iavasci,  have  been  applied  to  Agni  (Hymns  xxvi.,  v.  10,  and 
XXVII.,  V.  2).  The  Scholiast,  hoAvever,  interprets  the  compound, 
in  this  place,  the  great  or  abundant  protector  of  strength, — 
balasya  haMpdlahah ;  such  being  one  of  the  meanings  of  patra, 
given  in  the  Niruhta  {initrali  puru  trdyate),  where,  however,  that 
meaning  is  only  the  etymological  explanation  of  putra,  a  son. — 
Nirukta,  II.,  11. 

*^  Devk  *  sunritd,  the  goddess  of  speech  ( Vdgdevatd)  in  the 
form  of  lover  of  truth  [priyasatyarupd),  a  form  of  Saraswat'i. 


112  RIG- VEDA    SAJS'HITA. 

wealth  fit  to  be  accepted  enjoys  inexhaustible 
abundance :  for  him  we  worship  Ila,''  attended  by- 
brave  warriors,  inflicting  much  injury,  receiving 
none. 

5.  Yerily,  Brahmanaspati  proclaims  the  sacred 
prayer  in  which  the  divinities  Indra,  Yaruna, 
MiTRA,  and  Artaman  have  made  their  abode." 
Varga  XXI.  Q,  Let  US  rccito,  gods,  that  felicitous  and  fault- 
less prayer  at  sacrifices.  If  you,  leaders,  desire  (to 
hear)  this  prayer,  then  will  all  that  is  to  be  spoken 
reach  unto  you. 

7.  Who  (except  Brahmanaspati,)  may  approach 
the  man  who  is  devoted  to  the  gods,  by  whom  the 

*  Manoh  putr'i,  the  daughter  of  Manu,  and  institutrix  of  sacri- 
fices (see  p.  82,  note  a).  Looking  upon  Brahmaiiaspati  as  the  pre- 
siding divinity  of  prayer  or  sacrifice,  allusion  to  77a  were  not 
wholly  out  of  place.  Why  she  should  be  suvird,  if  that  be  rightly 
explained  sohJmnair  vimir  bhat'air  i/uktd,  accompanied  by  excellent 
heroes,  does  not  appear. 

"  This  and  the  next  verse  are  directed  to  be  recited  at  the 
AgnisMoma  ceremony,  in  connexion  with  prayers  addressed  to 
Indra  and  the  Maruts.  Professor  Roth  cites  it  in  proof  of  his 
theory,  that  Brahmanaspati  is,  in  an  especial  manner,  the  divinity 
of  prayer,  which  is  not  incompatible  with  his  being  identical  with 
either  Agni  or  Indra,  in  the  same  capacity.  Ho  recites,  it  is  said, 
aloud  (pravadati)  the  prayer  {mantram)  which  ought  to  be  so 
recited  {uWii/am)  by  the  mouth,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  of  the 
Sbtri ;  in  which  mantra,  Indra  and  the  rest  abide,  or  are  mysti- 
cally present.  Or,  as  explained  in  the  commentary  on  the  next 
stanza,  it  is  the  mantra,  or  prayer,  that  generates  or  brings  them  to 
the  presence  of  the  worshipper, — Indrddisarvadevatupratipddakam 
mantram. 


FIRST    ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHYAYA.  113 

clipped  sacred  grass  is  spread  ?  The  giver  of  the 
oblation  has  proceeded,  with  the  priests,  (to  the  hall 
of  sacrifice) ;  for  he  has  a  dwelling  (abounding),  in- 
ternally, with  precious  things. 

8.  Let  Brahman ASPATi  concentrate  his  strength. 
Associated  with  the  regal  (divinities),  he  slays  (the 
foe) :  in  the  time  of  danger,  he  maintains  his  station : 
armed  with  the  thunderbolt,^  there  is  no  encourager 
nor  discourager  of  him  in  a  great  battle  or  a  small. 

Si5kta  VI.  (XLI.) 

The  Rishi  is  Kanwa  ;  the  three  first  and  the  three  last  stanzas 
are  addressed  to  Vakuna,  Mitea,  and  AErAMAis^ ;  the  middle 
three,  to  the  i^DiTYAs  :''  the  metre  is  Gdyatr'u 

1.  The  man  whom  the  wise  Yaruna,  Mitra,  and  Vargaxxii. 
Aryaman  protect  quickly  subdues  (his  foes). 

2.  He  whom  they  heap  (with  riches),  as  if  (col- 
lected) by  his  own  arms  ;  the  man  whom  they 
defend  from  the  malignant ;  every  such  man,  safe 
from  injury,  prospers. 

3.  The  kings  (Yaeuna,  &c.,)  first  destroy  their 
strongholds,  and  then  the  foes  of  those  (who  wor- 
ship them),  and  put  aside  theii'  evil  deeds. 


"  This  attribute  would  identify  him  with  Indra,  in  which 
character  he  appears  throughout  this  hymn. 

^  In  fact,  the  hymn  may  he  considered  as  wholly  addressed  to 
the  Adityas  ;  for  the  three  deities,  separately  named,  are,  in  one  of 
their  characters,  Adityas,  also ;  that  is,  they  were  the  sons  of  Aditi, 
the  wife  of  Kasyapa,  and  are  representatives  of  the  sun,  in  as 
many  months  of  the  year. 

12 


114  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

4.  Adityas,  to  you,  repairing  to  the  sacrifice,  the 
path  is  easy  and  free  from  thorns:  no  unworthy 
oblation  is  here  prepared  for  you. 

5.  Adityas,  guides,  may  the  sacrifice  which  you 
come  to  by  a  straight  path  be,  to  you,  for  your 
gratification. 

Varga  XXIII.  6.  That  mortal  (whom  you  favour),  exempt  from 
harm,  obtains  all  valuable  wealth,  and  offspring  like 
himself. 

7.  How,  my  friends,  shall  we  recite  praise  (wor- 
thy) of  the  great  glory  of  Mitra,  Yaruna,  and 
Aryaman  ? 

8.  I  do  not  denounce  to  you  him  who  assails  or 
reviles  the  man  devoted  to  the  gods :  I  rather  pro- 
pitiate you  with  offered  wealth. 

9.  For  he  (the  worshipper,)  loves  not,  but  fears 
to  speak,  evil  (of  any  one) ;  as  a  gamester  fears  (his 
adversary)  holding  the  four^  (dice),  until  they  are 
thrown. 

*  The  text  has  only  chaturas  chid  dadamdndd  hihhhjad  a  ni- 
dhdtoh,  he  may  fear  from  one  holding  four,  until  the  fall.  The 
meaning  is  supplied  by  the  Scholiast,  with  the  assistance  of  Ydska, 
chaturd'  hshdn  dhdrayatah  *  *  kitavdt,  from  a  gambler  holding 
four  dice ;  Sdyana  says,  four  coiori  shells, — haimrdahdh.  That  is, 
where  two  men  are  placing  together,  the  one  who  has  not  the 
throw  of  the  dice  or  the  shells  is  in  anxious  apprehension  lest  it 
should  be  against  him. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA THIRD  ADHYAYA.  115 

SdKT^  VII.   (XLII.) 

Rishi  and  metre,  as  before :  the  deity  is  Pijshan.'^ 

1.  PusHAN,  convey  us  over  the  road;  remove  the  varga xxiv. 
wicked  (obstructer  of  the  way).     Son  of  the  cloud, 

deity,  go  before  us. 

2.  If  a  wicked  (adversary),  Pushan,  a  robber,  or 
one  who  delights  in  evil,  points  out  to  us  (the  way 
we  ought  not  to  go),  do  thou  drive  him  from  the 
road. 

3.  Drive  him  far  away,  apart  from  the  road,  the 
hinderer  of  our  journey,  a  thief,  a  deceiver. 

*  Pushan  is,  usually,  a  synonym  of  the  sun ;  that  is,  he  is  one 
of  the  twelve  Adityas.  He  is  described,  by  the  Scholiast,  as  the 
presiding  deity  of  the  earth, — prithivyahhimdmdevali:  he  is,  also, 
the  cherisher  of  the  world  ;  from  push,  to  nourish.  According  to 
the  tenour  of  the  hymn,  he  is  the  deity  presiding  especially  over 
roads  or  journeyings.  His  being  called  the  son  of  the  cloud  is 
not  incompatible  with  his  character  of  earth  personified  as  a  male; 
as,  according  to  other  texts  of  the  Veda,  the  earth  was  born  of  the 
water, — adhhjali  prithiv'i ;.  and,  again,  earth  was  the  essence  of 
the  water ;  Tad  yad  apdm  sdra  ds'it  tat  samahanyata  sd  prithivya- 
hhavat, — That  which  was  the  essence  of  the  waters,  that  was  aggre- 
gated, and  it  became  earth.  Pushd  occurs,  also,  as  a  feminine 
noun,  in  which  case  it  appears  to  be  synonymous  with  prithiv'i, 
the  earth,  as  in  the  text :  Pashddhwanah  pdtu,  which  is  explained, 
iyam  *  pushd,  May  this  Pushd  protect  the  roads ;  where  the 
gender  is  denoted  by  the  feminine  pronoun  tyam  :  and,  in  another 
text,  Ii/am  vai  pusheyam  hidani  sarvam  pushyati, — This  is,  verily, 
Pushd;  for  she  chcriahes  this  whole  world.  Throughout  the 
hymn,  however,  Pushan  is  masculine. 


116  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

4.  Trample,  with  your  feet,  upon  the  mischievous 
(body)  of  that  evil-minded  pilferer  of  both  (what  is 
present  and  what  is  absent),  whoever  he  be. 

5.  Sagacious  and  handsome  Pushan,  we  solicit  of 
thee  that  protection  wherewith  thou  hast  encou- 
raged the  patriarchs. 

Vargaxxv.  6.  Therefore,  do  thou,  who  art  possessed  of  all 
prosperity,  and  well-equipped  with  golden  weapons, 
bestow  upon  us  riches  that  may  be  liberally  dis- 
tributed. 

7.  Lead  us  past  our  opponents :  conduct  us  by 
an  easy  path  :  know,  Pushan,  how  to  protect  us 
on  this  (journey).'' 

8.  Lead  us  where  there  is  abundant  fodder :  let 
there  be  no  extreme  heat  by  the  way :  Pushan, 
know  how  to  protect  us  on  this  (journey). 

9.  Be  favourable  to  us ;  fill  us  (with  abundance)  ; 
give  us  (all  good  things) ;  sharpen  us  (with  vigour) ; 
fill  our  bellies  :  Pushan,  know  how  to  protect  us 
on  this  (journey). 

10.  We  do  not  censure  Pushan,  but  praise  him 
with  hymns :  we  solicit  the  good-looking  (Pushan) 
for  riches. 


*  In  this  and  the  two  next  verses,  we  have  an  example  of  what 
is  not  nnfrequent,  the  repetition  of  a  phrase,  as  a  sort  of  burden 
or  refrain.  The  expression  is,  Piishann  iha  kratum  vidaJi, — Piishan, 
know,  here,  the  act  or  business ;  that  is,  on  this  occasion,  or  journey, 
know  how  to  fulfil  your  function  of  giving  us  protection.  Rosen 
renders  it,  Pushan  !  hie  sacrificium  animadverte ;  Jcratu  meaning  an 
act  of  sacrifice,  as  well  as  act  or  action  in  general. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA— THIRD    ADHYAYA.  117 

SlJKTA    VIII.    (XLIII.) 

The  Rishi  is  the  same  :  the  deity  is  Rudka  ;*  the  thii'd  stanza  is 
addressed  to  Mitra  and  Vakxjna,  also;  and  the  last  three 
verses,  to  Soma  :  the  metre  of  the  last  verse  is  AraisMiibh  ;  of 
the  rest,  Gdyatr'i. 

1.  When  may  we  repeat  a  most  grateful  hymn  ^^^^^  xxvi. 
to  the  wise,  the  most  bountiful,  and  mighty  Eudra, 

who  is  (cherished)  in  our  hearts  ? 

2.  By  which  earth  may  (be  induced  to)  grant  the 
gifts  of  Eudea"  to  our  cattle,  our  people,  our  cows, 
and  our  progeny ; 

3.  By  which  Mitra,  and  Yaruna,  and  Eudra, 
and  all  the  gods,  being  gratified,  may  show  us 
(favour). 

4.  We  ask  the  felicity  of  S'anyu*'  from  Eudra, 


*  According  to  the  Scholiast,  Rudra  means,  "he  who  makes  to 
weep,  who  causes  all  to  weep  at  the  end  of  time  ;"  thus  identi- 
fying him  with  the  destroying  principle,  or  8'iva.  But  there  is 
nothing,  in  the  hymn,  to  bear  out  such  an  identification  :  on  the 
contrary,  he  appears  as  a  beneficent  deity,  presiding  especially 
over  medicinal  plants. 

^  Aditi  is  here  said  to  mean  the  earth,  who,  it  is  wished,  may 
so  act  {kara'y),  that  Rudriya  may  be  obtained.  The  meaning  of 
Rudriya,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  is,  Rudrasamhandhi  hhesha- 
jam,  — medicament  in  relation  to,  or  presided  over  by,  Rudra,  con- 
formably to  the  text,  Yd  te  Rudra  sivd  tanuh,  sivd  vikcd  ha,  hheshaj'i 
Hvd,  Rudrasya  hheshaj'i, — Whatever  are  thy  auspicious  forms,  0 
Rudra,  they  are  all  auspicious ;  auspicious  are  medicaments,  the 
medicaments  of  Rudra. 

■^  Sanyu  is  said  to  be  the  son  of  Brihaspati :  nothing  more  is 
related  of  him. 


118  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

the  encourager  of  hymns,  the  protector  of  sa- 
crifices, possessed  of  medicaments  that  confer 
delight  I" 

5.  Who  is  brilliant  as  Surya,  who  gratifies 
like  gold,  the  best  of  the  gods,  the  provider  of 
habitations ; 
Varga  XXVII.  6.  Who  bostows  casily-obtaincd  happiness  on  our 
steeds,  our  rams,  our  ewes,  our  men,  our  women, 
and  our  cows. 

7.  Soma,  grant  us  prosperity  more  than  (sufficient 
for)  a  hundred  men,  and  much  strength-engendering 
food. 

8.  Let  not  the  adversaries  of  Soma,  let  not  our 
enemies,  harm  us  :  cherish  us,  Indra,  with  (abun- 
dant) food. 

9.  Soma,  who  art  immortal,  and  abidest  in  an 
excellent  dwelling,  have  regard  for  thy  subjects, 
when,  at  their  head,  in  the  hall  of  sacrifice,  thou 
observest  them  (engaged  in)  decorating  thee." 

ANUVAKA  IX. 

SiJkta  I.  (XLIV.) 
Peaskanwa,  the  son  of  Kanwa,  is  the  Rishi :  Agki  is  the  deity; 

^  Jaldshabheshajam,  he  who  has  medicaments  conferring  de- 
light; from  Ja,  one  born,  and  lusJia,  happiness  ;  an  unusual  word, 
except  in  a  compound  form,  as  ahhihisha,  which  is  of  current  use. 
Or  it  may  mean,  "  sprung  from  water  (Jala) ;"  all  vegetables  de- 
pending upon  water,  for  their  growth. 

''  Apparently,  there  is  some  confusion  of  objects  in  this  place ; 
Soma,  the  moon,  being  confounded  with  Soma,  Libation. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  119 

but  the  two  first  verses  are  addressed,  also,  to  the  Aswins  and 
to  UsHAS  (the  dawn) :  the  metre  is  Brihafi,  in  the  odd  verses ; 
Satohrihati,  in  the  even. 

1.  Agni,  who  art  immortal,  and  cognizant  of  all 
begotten  things,  bring,  from  the  dawn,  to  the  donor 
(of  the  oblation),  wealth  of  many  sorts,  with  an 
excellent  habitation :  bring  hither,  to-day,  the  gods, 
awaking  with  the  morning. 

2.  For  thou,  Agni,  art  the  accepted  messenger 
of  the  gods,  the  bearer  of  oblations,  the  vehicle  of 
sacrifices/  Associated  with  Ushas  and  the  Aswins, 
bestow  upon  us  abundant  and  invigorating  food. 

3.  We  select,  to-day,  Agni,  the  messenger,  the 
giver  of  dwellings,  the  beloved  of  many,  the  smoke- 
bannered,  the  light-shedding,  the  protector  of  the 
worship  of  the  worshipper  at  the  break  of  day. 

•  4.  I  praise  Agni  at  the  break  of  day,  the  best 
and  youngest  (of  the  gods),  the  guest  (of  man),  the 
universally-invoked,  who  is  friendly  to  the  man  that 
offers  (oblations),  who  knows  all  that  are  born,  that 
he  may  go  (to  bring)  the  other  divinities. 

5.  Agni,  immortal  sustainer  of  the  universe, 
bearer  of  oblations,  deserving  of  adoration,  I  will 
praise  thee,  who  art  exempt  from  death,  the  pre- 
server, the  sacrificer. 

*  RatMr  adhwardndm.  Rosen  renders  rath'ih,  auriga ;  but  Sd- 
yana  explains  it,  ratliasthdniya,  in  the  place  of  a  chariot  j  con- 
firmed by  other  texts ;  as,  Esha  hi  devarathah,  He  {Agni)  is,  verily, 
the  chariot  of  the  gods,  and  Ratho  ha  vd  esha  hhktehhyo  devehhyo 
havyam  vahati,  Truly,  he  is  the  chariot  that  bears  the  oblation  to 
the  spirits  and  the  gods. 


Varga 
XXVIII. 


120  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 


Varjia  XXIX. 


6.  Juvenile  Agni,  whose  flames  delight,  who  art 
universally  invoked,  and  art  praised,  (by  us,)  on 
behalf  of  the  worshipper,  understand  (our  wishes), 
and,  granting  Peaskanwa  to  live  a  lengthened  life, 
do  honour  to  the  divine  man.'' 

7.  All  people  kindle  thee,  Agni,  the  sacrificer, 
the  omniscient.  Do  thou,  Agni,  who  art  invoked  by 
many,  quickly  bring  hither  the  sapient  deities. 

8.  Object  of  holy  rites,^  (bring  hither,)  on  the 
dawn  following  the  night,  Savitri,  Ushas,  the 
AswiNs,  Bhaga,"  and  Agni.  The  Kanwas,  pouring 
out  libations,  kindle  the  wafter  of  the  burnt-offer- 
ing. 

9.  Thou,  Agni,  art  the  protector  of  the  sacrifices 
of  the  people,  and  the  messenger  (of  the  gods). 
Bring  hither,  to-day,  the  gods,  awaking  at  dawn,  and 
contemplating  the  sun,  to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

10.  Eesi)lenden't  Agni,  visible  to  all,  thou  hast 
blazed  after  many  preceding  dawns ;  thou  art  the 
protector  (of  people)  in  villages  ;  thou  art  the  asso- 
ciate of  man  placed  on  the  east  (of  the  altar).*^ 

Vargaxxx.  H.  Wc  placc  thee,  Agni,  as  Manus  placed  thee, 
who  art  the  implement  of  sacrifice,  the  invoker,  the 
ministering  priest,  very  wise,  the  destroyer  (of  foes), 
immortal,  the  messenger  (of  the  gods). 


*  Namasyd  daivyam  janam ;  that  is,  the  RisJii  of  the  hymn, 
Prasliamca. 

*  Swadhwara ;  from  su,  good,  and  adhivara,  sacrifice ;   equiva- 
lent, according  to  the  Scholiast,  to  the  Ahavamya  fire. 

•^  Bhaga  is  one  of  the  Adityas. 

^  Purohita,  which  may  also  mean  the  domestic  priest. 


FIEST   ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHYATA.  121 

12.  When,  cherisher  of  friends,  thou  art  present, 
as  the  Purohitcij  at  a  sacrifice,  and  dischargest  the 
mission  to  the  gods,  then  thy  flames  roar,  like  the 
resounding  billows  of  the  ocean. 

13.  Agni,  with  sharp  ears,  hear  me.  Let  Mitea 
and  Aryaman,  and  (other)  early-stirring  deities, 
with  all  the  accompanying  oblation-bearing  gods, 
sit  down  at  the  sacrifice,  upon  the  sacred  grass. 

14.  Let  the  munificent  Maruts,  who  have 
tongues  of  fire,  and  are  encouragers  of  sacrifice, 
hear  our  praise  :  let  the  rite-fulfilling  Yaruna, 
with  the  AswiNS,  and  with  Ushas,  drink  the  Soma 
juice. 

SUKTA    II.    (XLV.) 

The  deity  and  Riski  are  the  same,  except  in  the  last  stanza  and 
the  half  of  the  preceding,  which  include  any  deified  being :  the 
metre  is  AnusMuhh. 

1.  Agni,  do  thou,  in  this  our  rite,  worship  the  Vargaxxxi. 
Vasus,   the   EuDRAS,    the  Adityas,    or    any   other 

(living)  being  sprung  from  IVIanu,  sacrificing  well, 
and  sprinkling  water."* 

2.  Verily,  the  discriminating  gods  are  givers  of 
rewards  to  the  ofi'erer  (of  oblations).  Lord  of  red 
coursers,  propitiated  by  our  praises,  bring  hither  the 
three  and  thirty  divinities.'' 


"■  Janam,  Manujdtam,  a  man  born  of  Manu.  Jana,  according 
to  the  Scholiast,  here  signifies  a  divine  being  in  connexion  with 
the  divinities  enumerated, — another  man,  devatdrupa,  of  a  divine 
nature  or  form. 

"  We  have  had  these  alluded  to  on  a  former  occasion  (p.  97, 


122  T5IG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

3.  Agni,  accomplisher  of  solemn  acts,  cognizant 
of  all  who  are  born,  hear  the  invocation  of  Peas- 
KANWA,  as  thou  hast  heard  those  of  Peiyamedha, 
of  Atei,  of  Yirupa,  of  Angiras.^ 

4.  The  performers  of  great  ceremonies,  the  offer- 
ers of  acceptable  sacrifices,  have  invoked,  for  (their 
protection),  Agni,  shining,  amidst  the  solemnities, 
with  pure  resplendence. 

5.  Invoked  by  oblations,  giver  of  rewards,  listen 
to  these  praises  with  which  the  sons  of  Kanwa 
invoke  thee  for  protection. 

Varga XXXII.  6.  Agni,  grantor  of  abundant  sustenance,  who 
art  beloved  of  many,  the  sons  of  men  invoke  thee, 
radiant-haired,  to  bear  the  oblation  (to  the  gods). 

7.  The  wise  have  placed  thee,  Agni,  in  (their) 
sacrifices,  as  the  invoker,  the  ministrant  priest,  the 


note  b) ;  but,  according  to  the  Aitareya  Brdhmaim,  2,  18,  there  are 
two  classes,  of  thirty-three  divinities  each,  the  one  consisting  of 
those  formerly  specified,  who  are  termed,  also,  Soynapds,  or  drinkers 
oiihQ  Soma  juice,  and  the  other,  of  eleven  Pmya;^*  (the  same  with 
ih.Q  Apr'is,  T^.  2)\),  QlevQn  Anuyajas,  and  eleven  Vj^aycijas,  who 
are  to  be  propitiated  by  oblations  of  clarified  butter,  not  by  liba- 
tions of  Soma.  They  are,  evidently,  little  else  than  personifi- 
cations of  sacrifices. 

"  The  commentator,  on  the  authority  of  the  Nt'rukta,  III.,  17, 
calls  these,  all,  Eishis.  Atri  and  Angiras  are  always  enumerated 
among  the  Prajdpatis ;  Priyamedha  may  be  the  same  as  Pri- 
yavrata,  the  son  of  Swdyamhhuva  Ilanu  ;  and  we  have  a  Viriipa 
among  the  early  descendants  of  Vaivaswata  Manu,  who,  as  the 
father  of  lid,  is  the  Manu  of  the  Veda. —  Vishnu  Pur  ana,  pp.  53 
and  359. 


FIRST    ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHYAYA.  123 

donor  of  vast  wealth,  the  quick-hearing,  the  far- 
renowned. 

8.  The  wise  (priests),  with  effused  libations  of 
Soma  juice,  have  summoned  thee,  vast  and  brilliant 
Agni,  to  partake  of  the  (sacrificial  food),  as  they 
hold  the  oblation  on  the  part  of  the  individual  who 
presents  it. 

9.  Strength-generated,''  giver  of  rewards,  provider 
of  dwellings,  place  here,  to-day,  upon  the  sacred 
grass,  the  morning-moving  deities,  or  (other)  deified 
being,  to  drink  the  Soma  juice.^ 

10.  Worship,  with  conjoint  invocations,  Agni, 
the  present  deified  being.  Bounteous  divinities,  this 
is  the  Soma  juice :  drink  it ;  for  it  was  yesterday 
expressed.'^ 

SUKTA    III.     (XLVI.) 

The  Rishi,  as  before ;  the  deities  are  the  Aswins  ;  the  metre  is 

Gdyatn. 

1.  The  beloved  Ushas,  until  now  unseen,  scatters      "^^^ga 

XXXIII. 

*  Produced  by  friction,  which  requires  strength  to  perform 
effectually. 

^  In  this  and  the  next  stanza,  we  have,  again,  an  allusion  to 
some  divine  or  deified  person,  daivyam  janam,  or  to  some  other 
divinity,  without  particularizing  him.  It  maybe  intended  foriTa 
or  Prajdpati,  who,  with  Agni,  here  actually  addressed,  would 
make  up  the  thirty-three  divinities,  with  the  Vasus,  Htcdras,  and 
A'dityas. 

*  Tiro-ahnyam  is  said  to  be  the  appellation  of  the  Soma  juice 
80  prepared, — from  tiras,  oblique  or  indirect,  and  ahnyam,  diurnal; 
that  juice  which  is  expressed  on  the  preceding  day,  and  offered  on 
the  Bucceeding. 


124  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

darkness  from  the  sky.     As  wins,  I  greatly  praise 
you, 

2.  Who  are  divine,  of  pleasing  appearance,  chil- 
dren of  the  sea,^  willing  dispensers  of  wealth,  and 
granters  of  dwellings,  (in  recompense  of)  pious 
acts. 

3.  Since  your  chariot  proceeds,  (drawn)  by  your 
steeds,  above  the  glorious  heavens,  your  praises  are 
proclaimed  (by  us). 

4.  (AswiNs) ;  guides ;  the  sun,  (the  evaporator)  of 
the  waters,  the  nourisher,  the  protector  and  be- 
holder of  the  (solemn)  rite,  nouiishes  (the  gods) 
with  our  oblation, 

5.  I^ASATYAS,  accepting  our  praises,  partake  of 
the  exhilarating  Soma  juice,  the  animator  of  your 
minds. 

Varga  6.  AswiNS,  ajraut  us  that  inviororatins;  food  which 

may    satisfy   us,    having   dispelled    the   gloom   (of 
want).*" 

7.  Come,  as  a  ship,  to  bear  us  over  an  ocean  of 
praises :  harness,  Aswins,  your  car. 

8.  Your  vessel,  vaster  than  the  sky,  stops  on  the 
sea-shore  :   your  chariot  (waits  on  the  land) :   the 


*  Sindhumatard.  The  sun  and  moon,  as  the  Scholiast  states, 
are  said  to  be  born  of  the  sea, — sanmdrajau ;  and,  in  the  opinion 
of  some,  the  Aswi7is  are  the  same  as  the  sun  and  moon,  and  con- 
sequently, are  sea-born. 

^  The  original  has  only  "  disperse  the  darkness," — tamas 
tirah.  The  Scholiast  explains  the  darkness  to  signify  that  of 
poverty, — durid/ryarupam  andhakdram. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  125 

drops  fof  the  Soma  juice)  are   expressed  for  your 
worship. 

9.  Kanwas,  (ask  this  of  the  As  wins)  :  (How)  do 
the  rays  (of  the  sun  proceed)  from  the  sky  ?  (How) 
does  the  dawn  (rise)  in  the  region  of  the  waters  ? 
Where  do  you  desire  to  manifest  your  own  persons  ?' 

10.  There  was  light  to  irradiate  the  dawn :  the 
sun  (rose)  like  gold :  the  fire  shone  with  darkened 
flames. 

11.  A   fit   path   was   made   for   the   sun   to   govargaxxxv. 
beyond  the  boundary   (of  night) :  the  radiance  of 

the  luminary  became  visible. 

12.  The  worshipper  acknowledges  whatever  boon 
he  receives  from  the  AswiNS,  satiate  with  the  en- 
joyment of  the  Soma  juice. 

13.  Causers  of  felicity,  co-dwellers  with  your 
worshipper,  as  with  Manus,  come  hither,  to  drink  of 
the  Soma  juice,  and  (accept)  our  praise. 

14.  May  Ushas  follow  the  lustre  of  your  ap- 
proach, circumambient  Aswins  ;  and  may  you  be 
pleased  with  the  oblations  offered  by  night. 

15.  AswiNS,  may  you  both  drink  (the  libation) 


»  The  whole  of  this  stanza  is  very  elliptical  and  obscure,  and 
largely  indebted  to  the  Scholiast.  Literally,  it  would  run  :  "  Rays 
from  the  sky,  Kanioas,  cause  of  dwelling  in  the  place  of  the 
rivers,  where  do  you  wish  to  place  own  form?"  Sdi/atia  fills  this 
up,  by  supposing  that  the  KaAicas  are  directed  to  inquire  of  the 
Aswins  the  particulars  specified  in  the  translation.  Without  some 
such  addition,  however  conjectural  it  may  be,  it  were  impossible 
to  extract  any  meaning  out  of  such  a  passage. 


126  EIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

and  bestow  upon  us  happiness,  through  yoiti*  irre- 
proachable protection. 


FOUETH  ADHYAYA. 


'  ANUVAKA  IX.  (continued). 

Sl^KTA  IV.   (XL VII.) 

The  Rishi  is  Peaskanwa  :  the  deities  are  the  Aswins  :  the  metre 
of  the  odd  verses,  Brihat'i ;  of  the  even,  SatohrUiati. 

Varga  I.  1.  AswiNS,   cncouragers  of  sacrifice,   this    most 

sweet  Soma  juice  is  prepared  for  you.  Drink  it  of 
yesterday's  expressing,  and  grant  riches  to  the 
donor. 

2.  Come,  Aswins,  with  your  three-columned, 
triangular  car. "  The  Kanwas  repeat  your  praise  at 
the  sacrifice.     Graciously  hear  their  invocation. 

3.  Aswins,  encouragers  of  sacrifice,  drink  this 
most  sweet  Soma  juice :  approach,  to-day,  the  giver 
of  the  offering,  you  who  are  of  pleasing  aspects,  and 
bearers  of  wealth. 

4.  Omniscient  Aswins,  stationed  on  the  thrice- 
heaped  sacred  grass,  sprinkle  the  sacrifice  with  the 


*  Trivandhurem  trivrita  *  rathena,  with  a  car  with  three  posts, 
and  triangular,  is  the  explanation  we  have  had  before.  The  Scho- 
liast here  proposes  a  somewhat  diflferent  interpretation,  and  would 
render  the  terms  ;  having  three  undulating  fastenings  of  timber, 
and  passing,  unobstructedly,  through  the  three  worlds. 


FIRST    ASHTAKA FOURTH   ADHYAYA.  127 

sweet  juice.     The  illustrious  Kanwas,  with  effused 
libations,  invoke  you. 

5.  With  such  desired  aids  as  you  protected 
Kanwa  with,  do  you,  cherishers  of  pious  acts, 
preserve  us :  encouragers  of  sacrifice,  drink  the 
Soma  juice. 

6.  Good-looking  Aswins,  as  you  brought,  in  your    ^^^s^  i^- 
car,    bearers  of  wealth,  abundance   to    Sudas,'    so 

bring  to  us  the  riches  that  many   covet,  whether 
from  the  firmament  or  the  sky  beyond. 

7.  l^ASATYAS,  whether  you  abide  far  off,  or  close 
at  hand,  come  to  us,  in  your  well-constructed  car, 
with  the  rays  of  the  sun. 

8.  Let  your  coursers,  the  grace  of  the  sacrifice, 
bring  you,  to  be  present  at  our  rite.  Guides  (of 
men),  bestowing  food  upon  the  pious  and  liberal 
donor  (of  the  offering),  sit  down  on  the  sacred  grass. 

9.  Come,  Nasatyas,  with  your  sun-clad  chariot," 
in  which  you  have  ever  conveyed  wealth  to  the 
donor  (of  the  offering),  to  drink  of  the  sweet  Soma 
juice. 

10.  We  invoke,  with  chanted  and  recited  hymns, 
the  very  affluent  Aswins,  to  be  present,  for  our 
protection.  Have  you  not  ever  drunk  the  Soma 
juice  in  the  favoured  dwelling  of  the  Kanwas  ? 


*  Sudds  is  called  a  Raja,  the  son  of  Pijavana.  We  have  two 
princes  of  the  name  of  Suddsa,  in  the  Purdiias :  one,  in  the  solar 
line  {Vishnu  Purdiia,  p.  380) ;  the  other,  in  the  lunar,  the  son  of 
Divoddsor  {ibid.,  p.  454). 

''  Literally,  sun-skinned, — suryatwachd ;  that  is,  either  sur- 
rounded or  invested  by  the  sun,  or  like  him  in  bi-ightness. 


128  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 


StTKTA   V.    (XLVIII.) 

The  Rishi  is  the  same,  but  the  Hymn  is  addressed  to  Ushas,  the 
personified  dawn,  or  Aurora :  the  metre  is  the  same  as  in  the 
preceding. 

Vargaiii.  1.  UsHAS,  daughter  of  heaven,  dawn  upon  us 
with  riches :  diffuser  of  light,  dawn  upon  us  with 
abundant  food  :  bountiful  goddess,  dawn  upon  us 
with  wealth  (of  cattle), 

2.  Abounding  with  horses,  abounding  with  kine, 
bestowers  of  every  sort  of  wealth,''  (the  divinities  of 
morning)  are  possessed  of  much  that  is  necessary 
for  the  habitations  (of  men).  Usil\.s,  speak  to  me 
kind  words :   send  us  the  affluence  of  the  wealthy. 

3.  The  divine  Ushas  has  dwelt  (in  heaven,  of 
old).  May  she  dawn  to-day,  the  excitress  of  chariots 
which  are  harnessed  at  her  coming ;  as  those  who 
are  desirous  of  wealth  (send  ships)  to  sea." 

4.  Ushas,  at  thy  comings  wise  men  turn  their 
minds  to  benefactions.  Of  these  men  the  most 
wise  EIanwa  proclaims  the  fame. 


*  These  three  epithets  are,  all,  in  the  feminine  plural,  without  a 
substantive:  aiwdvat'ih,  gomatih,viswasuvidah:  the  Scholiast  sup- 
plies, therefore,  ushodevatdh,  the  divinities  of  dawn,  as  if  there 
were  many.     Rosen  supplies  horce  matutincc. 

^  The  text  is  Samudre  na  sravasyavah,  Like  those  desirous  of 
wealth  for  sea:  the  commentary  supplies  ''send  ships."  In  the 
beginning  of  the  stanza,  we  have  only  Wvdsoshdh,  which  the 
Scholiast  explains,  purd  nivdsam  akarot,  she  has  made  a  dwelling, 
formerly,  i.e.,  prahhdtam  kritavati,  she  produced  the  dawn. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FOURTH   ADHYAYA.  129 

5.  UsHAS,  nourishing  (all),  comes,  daily,  like  a 
matron,  the  directress  (of  household  duties),  con- 
ducting all  transient  (creatures)  to  decay.  (At  her 
coming)  each  biped  stirs ;  and  she  wakes  up  the 
birds. 

6.  She  animates  the  diligent,  and  sends  clients    vaiga  iv. 
(to  their  patrons),^  and,  shedder   of  dews,  knows 

not  delay.    Bestower  of  food,  at  thy  rising  the  soar- 
ing birds  no  longer  suspend  (their  flight). 

7.  This  auspicious  Ushas  has  harnessed  (her 
vehicles)  from  afar,  above  the  rising  of  the  sun ; 
and  she  comes  gloriously  upon  man,  with  a  hundred 
chariots.^ 

8.  All  living  beings  adore  her,  that  she  may  be 
visible :  bringer  of  good,  she  lights  up  the  world : 
the  affluent  daughter  of  heaven  drives  away  the 
malevolent,  and  disperses  the  absorbers  °  (of  mois- 
ture). 

9.  Shine  around,  Ushas,  with  cheering  lustre, 
bringing  us,  every  day,  much  happiness,  and  scatter- 
ing darkness. 

10.  Inasmuch,  bringer  of  good,  as  thou  dawnest, 

*  Vi  *  srijati  *  *  arthinah,  she  lets  loose  askers,  solicitors ;  for 
they,  says  Sdyaua,  having  risen  at  early  morning,  go  to  the  houses 
of  those  who  are  their  respective  benefactors, — te^pi  {ydchaMh) 
*  ushahkuh  samutthdya  swakiyaddtrigrihe  gacliclihanti. 

''  Perhaps,  "  with  many  rays  of  light "  is  what  is  intended  by 
the  many  chariots  of  the  dawn. 

•^  Sridhah,  i.e.,  soshayitr'm,  the  driers  up.  Possibly,  the  clouds 
arc  intended,  as  taking  up  the  dews  of  night :  but  no  explanation 
of  the  application  of  the  term  is  given. 

13 


Var-ii  V. 


130  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

the  breath  and  life  of  all  (creatures)  rest  in  thee. 
Diffuser  of  light,  come  to  us,  with  thy  spacious  car : 
possessor  of  wondrous  wealth,  hear  our  invocation. 

11.  UsHAS,  accept  the  (sacrificial)  food  which,  of 
many  kinds,  exists  among  the  human  race,  and 
thereby  bring  to  the  ceremony  the  pious,  who, 
offering  oblations,  praise  thee. 

12.  UsHAS,  bring,  from  the  firmament,  all  the 
gods,  to  drink  the  Soma  juice ;  and  do  thou  thyself 
bestow  upon  us  excellent  and  invigorating  food, 
along  with  cattle  and  horses. 

13.  May  that  Ushas,  whose  bright  auspicious 
rays  are  visible  all  around,  grant  us  desirable,  agree- 
able, and  easily-attainable  riches. 

14.  Adorable  Ushas,  whom  the  ancient  sages 
invoked  for  protection  and  for  food,  do  thou, 
(radiant)  with  pure  light,  (pleased)  by  our  offerings, 
accept  our  praises. 

15.  Ushas,  since  thou  hast,  to-day,  set  open  the 
two  gates  of  heaven  with  light, ""  grant  us  a  spacious 
and  secure  habitation  :  bestow  upon  us,  goddess, 
cattle  and  food. 

16.  Adorable  Ushas,  associate  us  with  much  and 
multiform  wealth,  and  with  abundant  cattle,  with 
all  foe-confounding  fame,  and,  giver  of  sustenance, 
with  food. 

"  The  east  and  west  points  of  the  horizon. 


FIRST  ASHTAKA — FOUKTH   ADHYAYA.  131 

SlJKTA    VI.    (XLIX.) 

The  Rishi  and  deity  are  the  same ;  the  metre  is  Atmshtuhh. 

1.  UsHAS,  come,  by  auspicious  ways,  from  above    "^^^ga  vr. 
the  bright  (region  of  the)  firmament :  let  the  purjDle 

(kine)  '■"  bring  thee  to  the  dwelling  of  the  offerer  of 
the  Soma  juice. 

2.  UsHAS,  in  the  ample  and  beautiful  chariot  in 
which  thou  ridest,  come,  to-day,  daughter  of  heaven, 
to  the  pious  offerer  of  the  oblation. 

3.  White-complexioncd  Ushas,  upon  thy  coming 
bipeds  and  quadrupeds  (are  in  motion),  and  the 
winged  birds  flock  around,  from  the  boundaries  of 
the  sky. 

4.  Thou,  Ushas,  dispersing  the  darkness,  illu- 
minest  the  shining  universe  with  thy  rays  :  such  as 
thou  art,  the  Kanwas,  desirous  of  wealth,  praise 
thee  with  their  hymns. 

SlJKTA     VII.     (L.) 

Pkaskanwa  is,  still,  the  Risln ;  the  deity  is  Surya,  the  sun.  The 
first  nine  stanzas  are  in  the  Gdyatr'i  metre  ;  the  last  four,  in  the 
AnusJit'ubh. 

1.  His   coursers   bear   on   high   the   divine   all-    Vargavii. 
knowing   Sun,  that  he   may  be  seen   by  all  (the 
worlds). 

2.  (At  the  approach)  of  the  all-illuminating  Sun, 

So  the  Nighant'u, — aninijo  gdva  ushasdm,  purple  cows,  the 
vehicles  of  the  morninc:. 


132  RIG- VEDA  SANHITA. 

the  constellations^'  depart,  with  the  night,  like 
thieves. 

3.  His  illuminating  rays  behold  men  in  succession, 
like  blazing  fires. 

i.  Thou,  SuRYA,  outstrippest  all  in  speed  ;^  thou 
art  visible  to  all ;  thou  art  the  source  of  light  ;*"  thou 
shinest  throughout  the  entire  firmament. 


*  Nahhatrd,  the  stars  in  general,  or  the  lunar  asterisms, 
which,  according  to  different  texts,  are  considered  to  he  the  abodes 
of  the  gods,  or  the  visible  forms  of  pious  persons  after  death ;  as, 
J)evagrihd  vainahhatrcini,  The  constellations  are,  verily,  the  dwell- 
ings of  the  gods ;  and,  again,  Yo  vd  iha  yqjate  ^micm  lokam  nak- 
shate,  either,  He  who  performs  worship  here  obtains  the  next 
world,  or,  Sulcritdmvd  etdni  jyot'insM  yan  nahshatrdiii,  Those  con- 
stellations are  the  luminaries  of  those  who  practise  religious  acts, 
that  is,  according  to  Sdyana,  those  who,  by  attending  to  religious 
duties  in  this  world,  attain  Swarga,  are  beheld  in  the  form  of  con- 
stellations,— iha  loke  harmdnusMJidya  ye  swargam  prdpnuvanti  te 
nahshatrariipefia  drisyante. 

^  Sdyana  says,  that,  according  to  the  Smriti,  the  sun  moves 
2,202  yojanas  in  half  a  twinkle  of  the  eye. 

"  Jyotishhrit,  giving  light  to  all  things,  even  to  the  moon  and 
the  planets,  by  night :  for  they,  it  is  said,  are  of  a  watery  sub- 
tance,  from  which  the  rays  of  the  sun  are  reflected ;  in  like  man- 
ner as  the  rays  of  the  sun,  falling  upon  a  mirror  placed  in  the 
doorway  of  a  chamber,  are  reflected  into  the  interior,  and  give  it 
light.  Sdyana  also  explains  the  whole  passage  metaphysically, 
identifying  the  sun  with  the  supreme  spirit,  who  enables  all 
beings  to  pass  over  the  ocean  of  existence,  who  is  beheld  by  all 
desirous  of  final  emancipation,  who  is  the  author  of  true  or 
spiritual  light,  and  who  renders  everything  luminous  through  the 
light  of  the  mind. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA. — FOURTH   ADHYAYA.  133 

6.  Thou  risest  in  the  presence  of  the  Maruts,'' 
thou  risest  in  the  presence  of  mankind,  and  so  as 
to  be  seen  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  (region)  of 
heaven. 

6.  "With  that  light  with  which  thou,  the  purifier  Varga  viii. 
and  defender  from  evil,  lookest  upon  this  creature- 
bearing  world, 

7.  Thou  traversest  the  vast  ethereal  space,  mea- 
suring days  and  nights,  and  contemplating  all  that 
have  birth. 

8.  Divine  and  light- diffusing  Surya,  thy  seven 
coursers''  bear  thee,  bright -haired,  in  thy  car. 

9.  The  Sun  has  yoked  the  seven  mares''  that 
safely  draw  his  chariot,  and  comes  with  them  self- 
harnessed. 

10.  Beholding  the  up-springing  light  above  the 
darkness,  we  approach  the  divine  Sun,  among  the 
gods,  the  excellent  light.'^ 


^  The  text  has  pratyan  devundm  visah,  before  the  men  or 
people  of  the  gods,  that  is,  the  Marufs,  who,  in  another  Vaidih 
text,  are  so  designated  :  Maruto  vai  devdndm  visah. 

^  Sapta  *  haritaJt,  which  may,  also,  mean  the  seven  rays.  The 
seven  horses  are  the  days  of  the  week :  the  seven  rays  may  ex- 
press the  same.  They  can  scarcely  be  referred  to  the  prismatic 
rays,  although  the  numerical  coincidence  is  curious. 

^  Sapita  swidhyuvah,  i.e.,  akcastriyah,  mares.  They  are,  also,  called 
naptyah,  because  with  them  the  car  does  not  fall :  ydhliir  *  ratho  * 
na  patati.     They  were  more  docile  than  those  of  Phaeton's  father. 

'^  Here,  again,  we  may  have  an  allusion  to  a  spiritual  sun.  The 
darkness,  it  is  said,  implies  sin,  and  the  approach  to  the  sun 
intimates  reunion  with  supreme  spirit;  as  in  other  tests,  Aganma 


134  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA* 

11.  Eadiant  with  benevolent  light,  rising  to-day, 
and  mounting  into  tlie  highest  heaven,  do  thou,  0 
Sim,  remove  the  sickness  of  my  heart,  and  the 
yellowness  (of  my  body).''' 

12.  Let  us  transfer  the  yellowness  (of  my  body) 
to  the  parrots,  to  the  starlings,  or  to  the  HaritdW' 
(tree). 

13.  This  Aditya  has  risen,  with  all  (his)  might, 


jyotir  iiUamam,  we  go  to  the  best  light ;  that  is,  we  become  identi- 
fied with  spiritual  light, — sdyujtjam  gachchhdmah ;  and,  again,  he 
(the  worshipper)  becomes  identical  with  that  which  he  worships, — 
tarn  yathd  yathopdsate  tad  era  Ihavati. 

^  Hridroga  may  also  mean  heart-burn  or  indigestion ;  hari- 
mdnam,  greenness  or  yellowness,  is  external  change  of  the  colour 
of  the  skin,  in  jaundice  or  bilious  affections.  This  verse  and  the 
two  following  constitute  a  tricha  or  triplet,  the  repetition  of 
which,  with  due  formalities,  is  considered  to  be  curative  of  disease. 
Surya,  thus  hymned  by  PrasJcanwa,  cured  him,  it  is  said,  of  a 
cutaneous  malady,  or  leprosy,  under  which  he  was  labouring. 
Accordingly,  8'aunaha  terms  the  couplets  a  mantra,  dedicated  to  the 
sun,  removing  sin,  healing  disease,  an  antidote  to  poison,  and  the 
means  of  obtaining  present  happiness  and  final  liberation.  The 
especial  worship  of  the  sun,  in  India,  at  the  time  of  the  first  incur- 
sions of  the  Mahommedans,  attributed  to  that  luminary's  having 
cured  Sdmla,  the  son  of  Krishna,  of  leprosy,  is  fully  related  by 
M.  Eeinaud,  in  his  interesting  Memoir e  sur  V  Inde,  and  was  then, 
no  doubt,  of  ancient  date,  originating  with  the  primitive  notions 
of  the  attributes  of  Skrya,  here  adverted  to.  The  hymn  is, 
throughout,  of  an  archaic  character. 

"  So  the  Scholiast  interprets  the  hdridrava  of  the  text,  haritdla- 
druma;  but  there  is  no  tree  so  called.  Haritdla  most  usually 
means  yellow  oiT^iment ;  hdridrava,  a  yellow  vegetable  powder. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FOURTH   ADHYAYA.  135 

destroying  my  adversary ;  for  I  am  unable  to  resist 
my  enemy.' 

ANUVAKA    X. 

StJKTA    I.    (LI). 

The  RisM  is  Savya,^  the  son  of  Augieas  :  the  Hymn  is  addressed 
to  Indra  :  the  two  last  verses  are  in  the  Trisht'ahh  metre  ;  the 
rest,  in  the  Jagat'i. 

1.  Animate,  with  praises,  that  ram,°  (Indra),  who    VnrgaTX. 
is  adored  by  many,  who  is  gratified  by  hymns,  and 

is  an  ocean  of  wealth ;  whose  good  deeds  spread 
abroad,  for  the  benefit  of  mankind,  like  the  rays  of 
light.  Worship  the  powerful  and  wise  Indra,  for 
the  enjoyment  of  prosperity. 

2.  The  protecting  and  fostering  Ribhus'^  hastened 
to  the  presence  of  Indra,  of  graceful  motion,  and 
irradiating    the   firmament,®   imbued    with   vigour, 


"  The  enemy  here  intended  is  sickness  or  disease. 

''  Angiras,  it  is  said,  having  performed  worship,  to  obtain  a 
son  who  should  resemble  Indra,  the  deity  became  his  son,  under 
the  name  of  Savya. 

•^  Tyam  mesham  ;  referring  to  a  legend  in  which  it  is  narrated, 
that  Indra  came,  in  the  form  of  a  ram,  to  a  sacrifice  solemnized  by 
Medhdtithi,  and  drank  the  Soma  juice.  Or  meaha  may  be  ren- 
dered "  victor  over  foes." 

'^  The  Rihhus  are  said,  here,  to  mean  the  Mariits,  by  whom 
Indra  was  aided  and  encouraged,  when  all  the  gods  had  deserted 
him ;  as  in  the  texts,  "  All  the  gods  who  were  thy  friends  have 
fled:  may  there  be  friendship  between  the  Maruts  and  thee;" 
and,  again,  "  The  Hands  did  not  abandon  him." 

®  Indra,  as  S'aJcra,  is  one  of  the  twelve  Adityas,  or  suns. 


136  Ria-VEDA   SANHITA. 

the  humiliator  of  liis  enemies,  the  performer  of  a 
hundred  pious  acts  ;  and  by  them  encouraging 
words  were  uttered.^ 

3.  Thou  hast  opened  the  cloud''  for  the  Angi- 
EASAS ;  thou  hast  shown  the  way  to  Atri,  who  vexes 
his  adversaries  by  a  hundred  doors  ;'  thou  hast 
granted  wealth,  with  food,  to  Yimada  •/  thou  art 
wielding  thy  thunderbolt  in  defence  of  a  worshipper 
engaged  in  battle. 

4.  Thou  hast  opened  the  receptacle  of  the 
waters ;  thou  hast  detained,  in  the  mountain,  the 
treasure  of  the  malignant ; ""  when  thou  hadst  slain 
Yritea,  the  destroyer/  thou  madest  the  sun  visible 
in  the  sky. 


*  They  exclaimed,  "  Strike;  Bhagavan,  be  valiant," — Frahara, 
Bhagavo  *  v'lryaswa. 

^  Tlie  term  is  gotra,  explained  either  a  cloud,  or  a  herd  of 
cattle.  Gotralhid,  as  a  name  of  Indra,  implies,  in  ordinary  Ian- 
gauge,  mountain-breaker, — that  is,  with  the  thunderbolt :  as 
applied  to  cattle,  it  alludes,  it  is  said,  to  the  recovery  of  the  cows 
stolen  hjPaiii.  In  either  case,  the  act  was  performed  in  consequence 
of  the  prayers,  or  for  the  benefit,  of  the  descendants  of  Angiras. 

"  By  a  number  of  means  or  contrivances, — yantras. 

*  Vimada  is  called,  in  the  commentary,  a  Maharshi. 

®  Parvate  ddnumad  vasu.  "  In  the  mountain"  implies  the 
dwelling  of  Indra.  Bdnumat  is  variously  explained,  as  one  doing 
an  injury,  hostile  or  malignant,  an  enemy;  or,  one  descended 
from  Banu,  a  Bdnava,  an  Asura  :  or  it  may  be  an  epithet  of  vasu, 
wealth,  "  fit  for  liberality;"  from  dunu,  giving. 

^  Vritra,  who  is  Aid ;  explained,  hantri,  the  slayer.  From  a 
text  cited  from  the  Yajiir-  Veda,  AM  appears  to  be  the  personifi- 
cation of  all  the  benefits  derivable  from  sacrifice,  knowledge. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FOURTH   ADHTATA.  137 

5.  Thou,  Indra,  by  thy  devices,  hast  humbled 
the  deceivers  who  presented  oblations  to  their  own 
mouths  :^  propitious  to  men,  thou  hast  destroyed 
the  cities  of  Pipru,  and  hast  well  defended  Ruis- 
WAN,  in  robber- destroying  (contests)." 

6.  Thou  hast  defended  Kutsa,  in  fatal  fights  with    Varga  x. 
S'usHNA ;  thou  hast  destroyed  S'ambara,  in  defence 

of  Atithigwa;  thou  hast  trodden,  with  thy  foot, 
upon  the  great  Arbuda  :  from  remote  times  wast 
thou  born,  for  the  destruction  of  oppressors/ 

7.  In  thee,  Iivdra,  is  all  vigour  fully  concen- 
trated ;  thy  will  delights  to  drink  the  Soma  juice : 
it  is  known,  by  us,  that  the  thunderbolt  is  deposited 
in  thy  hands.    Cut  off  all  prowess  from  the  foe. 

8.  Discriminate  between    the   Aryas   and   those 


fame,  food,  and  prosperity ;  8a  yat  sarvam  etat  samahhavat  tasmdd 
AMh, — Inasmuch  as  he  was  the  same  as  all  that,  therefore  he 
was  called  AM. 

^  According  to  the  Kaushitakis,  the  Astiras,  contemning  Agni, 
offered  oblations  to  themselves ;  and  the  Vdjasaney'is  relate,  that, 
when  there  was  a  rivalry  between  the  gods  and  Asums,  the  latter 
arrogantly  said,  "  Let  us  not  offer  sacrifice  to  any  one,"  and,  there- 
upon, made  the  oblations  to  their  own  mouths. 

^  Fipru  is  called  an  A  sura ;  Rijiswan,  a  worshipper  whom  they 
oppressed ;  dasyuhatyeshu,  in  battles  killing  the  Basyus, — robbers 
or  barbarians. 

^  S'ushna,  S'ambara,  and  Arbuda  are  designated  as  Asuras. 
Kutsa  we  have  had  before,  as  the  name  of  a  Rishi.  Atitkigioa  i» 
said  to  mean  the  hospitable,  and  to  be  also  termed  Bivoddsa ;  but 
it  does  not  appear  whether  he  is  the  same  as  the  Dkoddsa  of  the 
Purdnas.     [See  Vol.  II.,  p.  34,  note  b.] 


lo8  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

wlio  are  Dasijus  :^  restraining  those  who  perform  no 
religious  rites,  compel  them  to  submit  to  the  per- 
former of  sacrifices :  be  thou,  who  art  powerful,  the 
encourager  of  the  sacrificer.  I  am  desirous  of 
celebrating  all  thy  deeds,  in  ceremonies  that  give 
thee  satisfaction. 

9.  Indra  abides,  humbling  the  neglecters  of  holy 
acts,  in  favour  of  those  who  observe  them,  and 
punishing  those  who  turn  away  from  his  worship,  in 
favour  of  those  who  are  present  (with  their  praise). 
Yamra,  while  praising  him,  whether  old  or  ado- 
lescent, and  spreading  through  heaven,  carried  off 
the  accumulated  (materials  of  the  sacrifice).'' 

10.  If  Us  ANAS  should  sharpen  thy  vigour  by  his 
own,  then  would  thy  might  terrify,  by  its  intensity, 
both  heaven  and  earth.  Friend  of  man,  let  the 
will-harnessed  steeds,  with  the  velocity  of  the  wind, 
convey  thee,  replete  (with  vigour),  to  (partake  of  the 
sacrificial)  food. 

^  The  Aryas,  as  appears  from  this  and  the  next  verse,  and  as 
stated  by  the  Scholiast,  are  those  who  practise  religious  rites ; 
while  the  Basyus  are  those  who  do  not  observe  religious  ceremo- 
nies, and  are  inimical  to  those  who  do  ;  being,  probably,  the  un- 
civilized tribes  of  India,  yet  unsubdued  by  the  followers  of  the 
Vedas,  the  A'ryas,  the  respectable  or  civilized  race. 

''  The  text  is,  here,  obscure, —  Vamro  vijaglidna  sandihah;  Vamra 
destroyed  the  collections.  The  Scholiast  says,  that  a  Rishi 
named  Vamra  took  advantage  of  Indra^s  absence  from  a  sacrifice, 
to  carry  away  the  accumulated  heap  of  offerings,  the  marrow  or 
essence  of  the  earth ;  Tad  ralm'ikavapdsamhhdro  hhavati  urjam 
era  prithirydh. 


riKST   ASHTAKA — FOURTH    ADHYAYA.  139 

11.  When   Indra  is  delighted   with   acceptable   ^^^^'S^  ^^• 
hymns,  he  ascends  (his  car),  drawn  by  more  and 

more  obliquely- curveting  coursers :  fierce,  he  ex- 
tracts the  waters,  from  the  passing  (cloud),  in  a 
torrent,  and  has  overwhelmed  the  extensive  cities  of 

S'USHNA. 

12.  Thou  mountest  thy  chariot  willingly,  Indea, 
for  the  sake  of  drinking  the  libations.  Such  as  thou 
delightest  in  have  been  prepared  (at  the  sacrifice  of) 
S'Iryata."*  Be  pleased  with  them,  as  thou  art  grati- 
fied by  the  effused  So7na  juices,  (at  the  sacrifices)  of 
others.  So  dost  thou  obtain  imperishable  fame  in 
heaven. 

13.  Thou  hast  given,  Indea,  the  youthful  Vri- 
chaya''  to  the  aged  Kakshivat,  praising  thee,  and 
offering  libations.  Thou,  Sukeatu,  wast  Mena,  the 
daughter  of  Yeishanaswa."  All  these  thy  deeds  are 
to  be  recited  at  thy  worship. 

^  S'dryuta  was  a  Eujarshi, — according  to  the  Scholiast, — of  the 
race  of  Bhrigti.  The  Aitareija  Brdhmdna  calls  him  a  prince  of  the 
race  of  Manu.  The  term  is  a  patronymic,  implying  son  or  de- 
scendant of  S'arydti,  who  was  the  fourth  son  of  the  Mami  Vaivas- 
wata.  [See  p.  293,  note  c]  The  Rishi  Chyavana  married  his 
daughter;  and  a  solemn  sacrifice  was  held  on  the  occasion,  at  which 
Indra  and  the  Akoins  were  present.  Chyavana  appropriated  to 
himself  the  share  of  the  oblation  intended  for  the  Aiwins,  at  which 
Tndra  was  very  angry ;  and,  to  appease  him,  a  fresh  offering  was 
prepared.  The  Scholiast  quotes  this  story  from  the  Kaiishitahi 
Brdhmana.     It  is  detailed  in  the  Bhdgavata  and  PadmaPurdnas. 

"  Vrichayd,  it  is  said,  was  given  to  Kahshwat,  at  the  Rdjasuya 
ceremony.     No  notice  of  her  occurs  elsewhere. 

"  The  Brdhmana  is  cited  for  a  strange  story  of  Indra  s  having. 


140  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

14.  Indra  lias  been  had  recourse  to,  that  he 
may  assist  the  pious,  in  their  distress.  Praise  by 
the  Pajras''  is  (as  stable)  as  the  post  of  a  doorway. 
I^^^DRA,  the  giver  of  riches,  who  is  possessed  of 
horses,  cattle,  chariots,  and  wealth,''  is  present. 

15.  This  adoration  is  offered  to  the  shedder  of 
rain,  the  self-resplendent,  the  possessor  of  true 
vigour,  the  mighty.  May  we  be  aided,  Indra,  in 
this  conflict,  by  many  heroes,  and  abide  in  a  pros- 
perous (habitation,  bestowed)  by  thee. 

Si5kta  II.  (LII.) 

The  Rishi  and  divinity  are  the  same :  the  metre  of  the  thirteenth 

and  fifteenth  verses  is  Trisht'nhh  ;  of  the  rest,  Jagat'i. 

Varga  XII.  1.  Worship  well  that  ram,'  who  makes  heaven 
known,  whom  a  hundred  worshippers  at  once  are 
assiduous  in  praising.  I  implore  Indra,  with  many 
prayers,  to  ascend  the  car, — which  hastens,  like  a 
fleet  courser,  to  the  sacrifice, — for  my  protection. 

2.  When  Indra,  who  delights  in  the  sacrificial 
food,  had  slain  the  stream -obstructing  Vritra,  and 
was  pouring  down  the  waters,  he  stood  firm,  amid 
the  torrents,  like  a  mountain,  and,  endowed  with  a 

himself,  become  Mend,  the  daughter  of  Vrishanakva,  and  having, 
afterwards,  fallen  in  love  with  her.  The  Mend  of  the  Purdnas  is 
one  of  the  daughters  of  the  Pifris,  by  Swadhd,  and  the  wife  of 
Himavat,  the  king  of  the  mountains. 

'■*  The  Pajras  are  said  to  be  the  same  as  the  Angirasas. 

^  Or  it  may  be  rendered  "who  is  desirous  of  possessing," — 
expecting  such  gifts  from  the  institutor  of  the  ceremony. 

•^  See  p.  135,  note  c. 


FIRST   ASHT AKA — FOURTH  ADHYAYA.  141' 

thousand   means   of  protecting  (his   votaries),    in- 
creased in  vigour. 

3.  He,  who  is  victorious  over  his  enemies,  who  is 
spread  through  the  dewy  (firmament),  the  root  of 
happiness,  who  is  exhilarated  by  the  Soma  juice, — 
him  I  invoke,  the  most  bountiful  Indra,  along 
with  learned  priests,  with  a  mind  disposed  to  pious 
adoration  ;  for  he  is  the  bestower  of  abundant  food  : 

4.  That  Indra  whom,  in  heaven,  the  libations 
sprinkled  on  the  sacred  grass  replenish,  as  the 
kindred  rivers,  hastening  to  it,  fill  the  ocean :  that 
Indra  whom  the  Maruts,  the  driers  up  of  moisture, 
who  are  unobstructed,  and  of  undistorted  forms, 
attended,  as  auxiliaries,  at  the  death  of  Yritra, 

6.  His  allies,  exhilarated  (by  libations),  preceded 
him,  warring  against  the  withholder  of  the  rain ;  as 
rivers  rush  down  declivities.  Indra,  animated  by 
the  sacrificial  food,  broke  through  the  defences  of 
Bala,  as  did  Trita,  through  the  coverings  (of  the 
well).=» 

*  The  text  has  only  paridhir  iva  tritah  ;  and  tritah  may  mean 
triple  or  threefold;  making  the  phrase,  "as  through  triple  cover- 
ings," or  defences;  whence  Rosen  has  custodes  veliiti  a  trihis 
partihus  constitutos.  M.  Langlois  is  more  correct,  in  considering 
Tritah  as  a  proper  name ;  but  it  may  be  doubted  if  he  has  authority 
for  rendering  it  by  Soma, — ou  la  libation  quiprend  le  nam  de  Trita, — 
or  for  the  additional  circumstances  he  narrates.  The  legend  told 
by  the  Scholiast,  and  confirmed  by  other  passages  of  the  text,  as 
well  as  by  the  version  of  the  story  found  in  the  N'lti-manjar'i,  is 
wholly  different.  Ekata,  Dwita,  and  Trita  were  three  men  pro- 
duced in  water,  by  Agni,  for  the  purpose  of  removing  or  rubbing 
off  the  reliques  of  an  oblation  of  clarified  butter,  the  proper  func- 


"142  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

Varga  XTii.        6.  When,  Indra,  thou  haclst  smitten,  with  thy 
thunderbolt,  the  cheek  of  the  wide -extended  Ve,itra, 

tion  of  the  sacred  grass,  to  the  three  blades  of  which,  placed  on 
the  altar,  the  legend  maj^  owe  its  origin :  but  this  does  not  appear 
from  the  narrative.  The  Scholiast,  following  the  Taittiriyas, 
says  that  Agni  threw  the  cinders  of  the  burnt-offerings  into  water, 
whence  successively  arose  ^/l;«^«,Z>^t'^ to,  and  Trita,  who,  it  elsewhere 
appears,  were,  therefore,  called  Aptyas,  or  sons  of  water  (<SiU-teCV., 
V.  9).  Trita,  having,  on  a  subsequent  occasion,  gone  to  draw  water 
from  a  well,  fell  into  it ;  and  the  Asuras  heaped  coverings  over  the 
mouth  of  it,  to  prevent  his  getting  out ;  but  he  broke  through 
them  with  ease.  It  is  to  this  exploit  that  Indra' s  breaking  through 
the  defences  of  the  Asura  Bala  is  compared.  The  story  is  some- 
what differently  related  in  the  NUi-manjar'i.  Three  brothers,  it  is 
said,  Ehata,  Divita,  and  Trita,  were  travelling  in  a  desert,  and, 
being  distressed  by  thirst,  came  to  a  well,  from  which  the  youngest, 
Trita,  drew  water  and  gave  it  to  his  brothers.  In  requital,  they 
threw  him  into  the  well,  in  order  to  appropriate  his  property,  and, 
having  covered  the  top  with  a  cart-wheel,  left  him  in  the  well.  In 
this  extremity,  he  prayed  to  all  the  gods  to  extricate  him^  and,  by 
their  favour,  he  made  his  escape.  Paridhi,  the  term  of  the  text, 
means  a  circumference,  a  circular  covering,  or  lid.  Mr.  Colebrooke 
has  briefly,  but  with  his  usual  accuracy,  cited  this  story,  in  his 
account  of  the  Rig-  Veda  {As.  Researches,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  388).  Dr. 
Eoth  conceives  Trita  to  be  the  same  as  Traitana,  a  name  that  occurs 
in  a  text  of  the  Rich ;  and,  converting  the  latter  into  a  deification, 
he  imagines  him  to  be  the  original  of  Thraetona,  the  Zend  form  of 
Feridun,  one  of  the  heroes  of  the  Shdh-ndma,  and  of  ancient  Persian 
tradition. — Zeitschrift  der  B.  Ilorgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  Vol. 
II.,  p.  216.  Professor  Lassen  seems  disposed  to  adopt  this  identifi- 
cation.— Indische  Altcrthumshunde,  Additions.  The  identity  of 
Trita  and  Traitana,  however,  remains  to  be  established;  and  the 
very  stanza  quoted,  by  Dr.  Roth,  as  authority  for  the  latter  name, 
is  explained,  in  the  Niti-manjar'i,  in  a  very  different  sense  from  that 


FIRST   ASHTAKA FOURTH  ADHYAYA.  ]  43 

who,  having  obstructed  the  waters,  reposed  in  the 
region  above  the  firmament,  thy  fame  spread  afar, 
thy  prowess  was  renowned. 

7.  The  hymns,  Indra,  that  glorify  thee  attain 
unto  thee,  as  rivulets  (flow  into)  a  lake,  Twashtri 
has  augmented  thy  appropriate  vigour :  he  has 
sharpened  thy  bolt  with  overpowering  might. 

8.  Indra,  performer  of  holy  acts,  desirous  of 
going  to  man,  thou,  with  thy  steeds,  hast  slain 
Vritra,  (hast  set  free)  the  waters,  hast  taken,  in  thy 
hands,  thy  thunderbolt  of  iron,  and  hast  made  the 
sun  visible  in  the  sky. 

which  he  has  given.  It  is  said,  that  the  slaves  of  D'lrgliatamas, 
when  he  was  old  and  blind,  became  insubordinate,  and  attempted 
to  destroy  him,  first,  by  throwing  him  into  the  fire,  whence  he  was 
saved  by  the  Aswins,  then,  into  water,  whence  he  was  extricated 
by  the  same  divinities ;  upon  which,  Traitana,  one  of  the  slaves, 
wounded  him  on  the  head,  breast,  and  arms,  and  then  inflicted 
like  injuries  on  himself,  of  which  he  perished.  After  these  events, 
the  sage  recited,  in  praise  of  the  Asicins,  the  hymn  in  which  the 
verse  occurs  : — Na  met  garan  nadyo  mdtritamd,  ddsd  yad  km  susa- 
muMham  avddhuh  ;  siro  yad  asya  Traitano  vitahshat,  sway  am  ddsa 
tiro  ansdvapi  gdlia, — "  Let  not  the  maternal  waters  swallow  me, 
since  the  slaves  assaUed  this  decrepit  (old  man).  In  like  manner  as 
the  slave  Traitana  wounded  his  head,  so  has  he  struck  it,  of  himself, 
and,  likewise,  his  breast  and  shoulders."  [I.,  CLVIII.,  5  :  see 
Vol.  II.,  p.  103.]  If  this  interpretation  be  correct,  there  can  be 
little  relation  between  Trita  and  Traitana,  and  between  the  latter 
and  Feridiin.  The  former  term  has,  however,  found  admission 
as  a  numeral,  and,  apparently,  also  as  a  proper  name,  into  the 
Zend  books.  See  M.  Eurnouf's  "Etudes  sur  les  Textes  Zends," 
Journal  Asiatique,  k.y)T\\,  1845  :  see,  also,  the  word  Trita,  in  the 
Glossary  of  Benfey's  edition  of  the  Sdma-  Veda. 


144  KIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

9.  Through  fear  (of  Yeitra,  they,  the  wor- 
shippers,) recited  the  suitable  hymn  of  the  Brihat 
(Sd?7ia),''  self-illuminating,  strength-bestowing,  and 
ascending  to  heaven;  on  which  his  allies,  (the 
Maeuts),  combating  for  men,  (guardians)  of  heaven, 
and  vivifiers  of  mankind,  animated  Indea  (to 
destroy  him). 

10.  The  strong  heaven  was  rent  asunder  with 
fear,  at  the  clamour  of  that  Ahi,  when  thou,  Indra, 
wast  inspirited  by  (drinking)  the  effused  {Soma 
juice),  and  thy  thunderbolt,  in  its  vigour,  struck  off 
the  head  of  Vritra,  the  obstructor  of  heaven  and 
earth. 

VargaXiv.  11.  Although,  Indra,  the  earth  were  of  tenfold 
(its  extent),  and  men  multiplied  every  day,  yet, 
Maghavan,  thy  prowess  would  be  equally  re- 
nowned ;  the  exploits  achieved  by  thy  might  would 
be  spread  abroad,  with  the  heavens. 
,  12.  Firm-minded  Indra,  abiding,  (secure,)  in  thy 

strength,  beyond  the  limit  of  the  wide-expanded 
firmament,  thou  hast  framed  the  earth  for  our  pre- 
servation ;  thou  hast  been  the  type  of  vigour ;  thou 
hast  encompassed  the  firmament  and  the  sky,  as  far 
as  to  the  heavens. 

13.  Thou  art  the  type  of  the  extended  earth;" 

^  The  text  has  onlj  Brihat ;  the  Scholiast  adds  Sdma.  An  allusion 
to  the  Sdma,  in  a  verse  of  the  Rich,  would  indicate  the  priority  of 
the  former,  at  least  as  respects  this  hymn. 

^  JBhuvah  pratimdnam,  the  counter-measure  of  the  earth ;  that 
is,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  of  similar  magnitude  and  like  in- 
conceivable power. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FOURTH   ADHYATA.  145 

thou  art  the  lord  of  the  vast  god-frequented  {Swar- 
ga).  ^  Verily,  with  thy  bulk  thou  fillest  all  the  firma- 
ment :  of  a  truth,  there  is  none  other  such  as  thou. 

14.  Thou,  Indra,  of  whom  heaven  and  earth 
have  not  attained  the  amplitude ;  of  whom  the 
waters  of  heaven  have  not  reached  the  limit;  of 
whom,  when  warring,  with  excited  animation,  against 
the  withholder  of  the  rains,  (his  adversaries  have  not 
equalled  the  prowess); — thou,  alone,  hast  made  every- 
thing else  (than  thyself)  dependent  (upon  thee). 

15.  The  Maruts  worshipped  thee,  in  this  (en- 
counter). All  the  gods,  in  this  engagement,  imitated 
thee  in  exultation,  when  thou  hadst  struck  the  face 
of  Vritra  with  thy  angular  and  fatal  (bolt).^ 

Si5kta  III.  (LIII.) 

The  Rishi  and  divinity  are  the  same :  the  metre  of  the  tenth  and 

eleventh  stanzas  is  Trisht'ubh;  of  the  rest,  Jagati. 

1.  We  ever  offer  fitting  praise   to   the   mighty    Varga  xv. 
Indra,  in  the  dwelling  of  the  worshipper,  by  which 

he  (the  deity)  has  quickly  acquired  riches  ;  as  (a 
thief)  hastily  carries  (off  the  property)  of  the  sleep- 
ing. Praise  ill-expressed  is  not  valued  among  the 
munificent. 

2.  Thou,  Indra,  art  the  giver  of  horses,  of  cattle, 


*  Rishioavirasya  hrihatah  patih,  lord  or  protector  of  the  great 
(region),  in  which  are  the  pleasant  {rishwa)  gods  {v'lra). 

"  The  text  has  only  hhrisJit'imatd  vadliena, — with  the  killer  (or 
weapon)  that  has  angles.  According  to  the  Aitareya  Brdhmaiia, 
the  vajra,  or  thunderbolt,  of  Indra  has  eight  angles,  or,  perhaps, 
blades ;  ashfasrir  vai  vajrah. 

U 


146  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

of  barley,  the  master  and  protector  of  wealth,  the 
foremost  in  liberality,  (the  being)  of  many  days : 
thou  disappointest  not  desires  (addressed  to  thee)  : 
thou  art  a  friend  to  our  friends.  Such  an  Indra  we 
praise. 

3.  Wise  and  resplendent  Ijn^dea,  the  achiever  of 
great  deeds,  the  riches  that  are  spread  around  are 
known  to  be  thine :  having  collected  them,  victor 
(over  thy  enemies),  bring  them  to  us :  disappoint 
not  the  expectation  of  the  worshipper  who  trusts  in 
thee. 

4.  Propitiated  by  these  offerings,  by  these  liba- 
tions, dispel  poverty  with  cattle  and  horses.  May 
we,  subduing  our  adversary,  and  relieved  from 
enemies  by  Indra,  (pleased)  by  our  libations,  enjoy, 
together,  abundant  food. 

5.  Indra,  may  we  become  possessed  of  riches 
and  of  food ;  and,  with  energies  agreeable  to  many, 
and  shining  around,  may  we  prosper,  through  thy 
divine  favour,  the  source  ©f  prowess,  of  cattle,  and 
of  horses. 

Yarga  XVI.  6.  Thosc  who  wcrc  thy  allies  (the  Maruts,) 
brought  thee  joy.  Protector  of  the  pious,  those  li- 
bations and  oblations  (that  were  offered  thee,  on 
slaying  Yritra),  yielded  Ihee  delight,  when  thou, 
unimpeded  by  foes,  didst  destroy  the  ten  thousand 
obstacles"  opposed  to  him  who  praised  thee  and 
offered  thee  oblations. 

"  Dasa  vrifrdni  *  *  *  sahasrdni.  Vritrani  is  interpreted  by 
dvarakuni,  covers,  concealments,  obstructions. 


FIRST  ASHTAKA. — FOURTH    ADHYATA.  147 

7.  Humiliator  (of  adversaries),  thou  goest  from 
battle  to  battle,  and  destroyest,  by  thy  might,  city 
after  city.  With  thy  foe -prostrating  associate,  (the 
thunderbolt),  thou,  Indea,  didst  slay,  afar  off,  the 
deceiver  named  Namuchi.'' 

8.  Thou  hast  slain  Karanja  and  Parnaya  with 
thy  bright  gleaming  spear,  in  the  cause  of  Ati- 
THIGTVA.  Unaided,  thou  didst  demolish  the  hundred 
cities  of  Vangrida,  when  besieged  by  Rijiswan.^ 

9.  Thou,  renowned  Indra,  overthrewest,  by  thy 
not-to-be-overtaken  chariot-wheel,  the  twenty  kings 
of  men,  who  had  come  against  Susravas,  unaided, 
and  their  sixty  thousand  and  ninety  and  nine 
followers/ 

10.  Thou,  Indra,  hast  preserved  Susravas,  by 
thy  succour ;  Turvatana,  by  thy  assistance.  Thou 
hast  made  Kutsa,  Atithigwa,  and  Ayu'^  subject  to 
the  mighty,  though  youthful,  Susravas. 

11.  Protected  by  the  gods,  we  remain,  Indra,  at 
the  close  of  the  sacrifice,  thy  most  fortunate  friends. 

*  Namuchi  is  termed  an  Asura.  He  appears,  in  the  Purdnas,  as 
a  Ddnava,  or  descendant  of  Danu. 

^  The  first  two  are  the  names  of  Asiiras.  Atithigwa  we  have 
had  before :  Vangrida  is  called  an  Asura;  and  Rijiswan,  a  Raja. 
We  have  no  further  particulars ;  nor  do  they  appear  in  the  Pu- 
rdiias.     [See  Vol.  III.,  pp.  148,  481.] 

"=  Hero,  again,  wc  derive  no  aid  from  the  Bhdshya.  The  legend 
is  not  Paurdiiih  ;  and,  though  we  have  a  Susravas  among  the  Pra- 
jdpatis  in  the  Vdyu  Purdna,  he  does  not  appear  as  a  king. 

^  Ayus,  the  son  of  Puri,ravas,  may  be  intended ;  but  the  name, 
here,  is  Ayu,  without  the  final  sibilant. 


148  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

"We  praise  thee,  as  enjoying,  through  thee,  excellent 
offspring  and  a  long  and  prosperous  life. 


SUKTA    IV.    (LIV.) 

The  deity  and  Mishi  are  the  same  :  the  metre  of  the  sixth,  eighth, 
ninth,  and  eleventh  stanzas  is  Trisht'uhh ;  of  the  other  seven,  Jagat'i. 

Vargaxvii.  1-  Urge  US  not,  Maghavan,  to  this  iniquity,  to 
these  iniquitous  conflicts  ;  for  the  limit  of  thy 
strength  is  not  to  be  surpassed.  Thou  hast  shouted, 
and  hast  made  the  waters  of  the  rivers  roar.  How 
(is  it  possible)  that  the  earth  should  not  be  filled 
with  terror  ? 

2.  Offer  adoration  to  the  wise  and  powerful 
S'akra.  Glorifying  the  listening  Indea,  praise  him 
who  purifies  both  heaven  and  earth  by  his  irre- 
sistible might,  who  is  the  sender  of  showers,  and,  by 
his  bounty,  gratifies  our  desires. 

3.  Offer  exhilarating  praises  to  the  great  and 
illustrious  Indra,  of  whom,  undaunted,  the  steady 
mind  is  concentrated  in  its  own  firmness ;  for  he, 
who  is  of  great  renown,  the  giver  of  rain,  the 
repeller  of  enemies,  who  is  obeyed  by  his  steeds, 
the  showerer  (of  bounties),  is  hastening  hither. 

4.  Thou  hast  shaken  the  summit  of  the  spacious 
heaven ;  thou  hast  slain  S'ambara,  by  thy  resolute 
self;  thou  hast  hurled,  with  exulting  and  determined 
mind,  the  sharp  and  bright-rayed  thunderbolt  against 
assembled  Asuras. 

5.  Since  thou,  loud-shouting,  hast  poured  the 
rain  upon  the  brow  of  the   breathing  (wind),  and 


FIRST   ASHTAKA FOURTH    ADHYAYA.  149 

(on  the  head)  of  the  maturing  and  absorbing  (sun), 
who  shall  prevent  thee  from  doing,  to-day,  (as  thou 
wilt),  endowed  with  an  unaltered  and  resolute  mind  ? 

6.  Thou  hast  protected  !N"arya,  Turvasa,  Yadij,  Vargaxviir. 
and  TuRViTi,   of  the  race  of  Vayya/    Thou  hast 
protected  their  chariots  and  horses,^  in  the  unavoid- 
able engagement :  thou  hast  demolished  the  ninety- 
nine  cities  (of  S'ambara).' 

7.  That  eminent  person,  the  cherisher  of  the 
pious,  (the  institutor  of  the  ceremony),  promotes 
his  own  prosperity,  who,  while  offering  oblations  to 
Indra,  pronounces  his  praise ;  or  who,  along  with 
the  offerings  he  presents,  recites  hymns  (in  honour 
of  him).  For  him  the  bounteous  Indra  causes  the 
clouds  to  rain  from  heaven. 

8.  Unequalled  is  his  might  ;  unequalled  is  his 
wisdom.  May  these  drinkers  of  the  Soma  juice 
become  equal  to  him,  by  the  pious  act ;  for  they, 
Indra,  who  present  to  thee  oblations  augment  thy 
vast  strength  and  thy  manly  vigour. 

9.  These  copious  Soma  juices,  expressed  with 
stones,   and  contained  in  ladles,  are  prepared   for 

*  Of  these  names,  Turvasa  may  be  the  Turvasu  of  the  Purdiias, 
one  of  the  sons  of  Yaydti,  as  another,  Yadu,  is  named.  Narya 
and  Turv'iti  are  unknown  :  the  latter  appears  hereafter,  as  a  Rishi. 
See  Suhla  LXI.,  v.  11,  [Also  see  p.  104,  note  a,  and  p.  291, 
note  a.] 

*  BatJiam,  etasam.  The  latter  is  a  synonym  of  asica,  in  the 
Nighantu :  but  both  words  may,  also,  be  regarded  as  the  names  of 
two  Rishis.     [See  p.  329,  note  c] 

*^  The  commentary  supplies  this  appellation. 


150  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

thee  ;  they  are  the  beverage  of  Indra.  Quaff  them  ; 
satiate  thine  appetite  with  them ;  and,  then,  fix  thy 
mind  on  the  wealth  that  is  to  be  given  (to  us). 

10.  The  darkness  obstructed  the  current  of  the 
waters ;  the  cloud  was  within  the  belly  of  Yritra  : 
but  Indra  precipitated  all  the  waters  which  the 
obstructor  had  concealed,  in  succession,  down  to  the 
hollows  (of  the  earth). 

11.  Bestow  upon  us,  Indra,  increasing  reputa- 
tion ;  (bestow  upon  us)  great,  augmenting,  and  foe- 
subduing  strength ;  preserve  us  in  affluence ;  cherish 
those  who  are  wise ;  and  supply  us  with  wealth  from 
which  proceed  excellent  progeny  and  food. 

StfKTA    V.   (LV.) 

Deity  and  liisM,  as  before  ;  tlie  meti'e,  Jagat'i. 

VargaXix.  1-  The  amplitude  of  Indra  was  vaster  than  the 
(space  of)  heaven :  earth  was  not  comparable  to 
him,  in  bulk ;  formidable  and  most  mighty,  he  has 
been,  ever,  the  afflicter  (of  the  enemies  of)  those 
men  (who  worship  him) ;  he  whets  his  thunderbolt, 
for  sharpness,  as  a  bull,  (his  horns). 

2.  The  firmament-abiding  Indra  grasps  the  wide- 
spread waters  with  his  comprehensive  faculties,^  as 
the  ocean  (receives  the  rivers)  :  he  rushes,  (im- 
petuous,) as  a  bull,  to  drink  of  the  Soma  juice  ;  he^ 
the  warrior,  ever  covets  praise  for  his  prowess. 

*  Grihhndti  *  varmahhih, — he  grasps,  with  his  powers  of  com- 
prehending or  collecting,  samvaranaih ;  or,  it  may  be,  by  his 
vastness,  urutwaih. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA FOURTH   ADHYAYA.  151 

3.  Thou,  Indra,  hast  not  (struck)  the  cloud  for 
(thine  own)  enjoyment ;  thou  rulest  over  those  who 
are  possessed  of  great  wealth.  That  divinity  is  known, 
by  us,  to  surpass  all  others  in  strength:  the  haughty 
(Indra)  takes  precedence  of  all  gods,  on  account  of 
his  exploits. 

4.  He,  verily,  is  glorified  by  adoring  (sages)  in  the 
forest;  he  proclaims  his  beautiful  vigour  amongst 
men ;  he  is  the  grantor  of  their  wishes  (to  those  who 
solicit  him) ;  he  is  the  encourager  of  those  who 
desire  to  worship  (him),  when  the  wealthy  offerer 
of  oblations,  enjoying  his  protection,  recites  his 
praise. 

6.  Indra,  the  warrior,  engages  in  many  great 
conflicts,  for  (the  good  of)  man,  with  overwhelming 
prowess.  When  he  hurls  his  fatal  shaft,  every 
one  immediately  has  faith  in  the  resplendent 
Indra. 

6.  Ambitious  of   renown,    destroying   the   well-    vargaxx. 
built  dwellings  of  the  Asiiras^  expanding  like  the 

earth,  and  setting  the  (heavenly)   luminaries  free 
from  concealment,^  he,  the  performer  of  good  deeds, . 
enables  the  waters   to  flow,  for  the  benefit  of  his 
worshippers. 

7.  Drinker  of  the  Soma  juice,  may  thy  mind  in- 
cline to  grant  our  desires :  hearer  of  praises,  let  thy 
coursers  be  present  (at  our  sacrifice).  Thy  charioteers 
are  skilful  in  restraining  (thy  steeds)  ;  nor,  Indra, 

'^  The  siiu  and  the  constellations  were  obscured  by  the  same 
cloud  which  detained  the  aggregated  waters. 


162  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

can  crafty  (enemies),  bearing  arms,  prevail  against 
thee. 

8.  Thou  holdest,  in  thy  hands,  unexhausted 
wealth :  thou,  renowned  (Indea),  hast  irresistible 
strength  in  thy  body :  thy  limbs  are  invested  with 
(glorious)  exploits ;  as  wells  ^  (are  surrounded  by 
those  who  come  for  water) :  in  thy  members,  Indra, 
are  many  exploits. 

Si5kta  VI.  (LVI.) 
Deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  as  in  the  preceding. 
VargaXxi.  1.  Voracious  (Indra)  has  risen  up, — (as  ardently) 
as  a  horse  (approaches)  a  mare, — to  partake  of  the 
copious  libations  (contained)  in  the  (sacrificial) 
ladles.  Having  stayed  his  well-horsed,  golden,  and 
splendid  chariot,  he  plies  himself,  capable  of  heroic 
(actions,  with  the  beverage). 

2.  His  adorers,  bearing  oblations,  are  thronging 
round  (him) ;  as  (merchants)  covetous  of  gain  crowd 
the  ocean,  (in  vessels,)  on  a  voyage.  Ascend  quickly, 
with  a  hymn  to  the  powerful  Indra,  the  protector 
of  the  solemn  sacrifice ;  as  women  (climb)  a  moun- 
tain." 

.  3.  He  is  quick  in  action,  and  mighty  ;  his  faultless 
and  destructive  prowess  shines  in  manly  (conflict), 
— like  the  peak  of  a  mountain  (afar), — with  which, 


*  "  Like  wells  "  is  the  whole  of  the  simile,  in  the  usual  elliptical 
style  of  the  text :  the  amplification  is  from  the  commentary. 

^  The  Scholiast  here,  also,  ekes  out  the  scantiness  of  the  text, — 
as  women  climb  a  hill,  to  gather  flowers. 


FIEST   ASHTAKA — FOURTH    ABHYAYA.  153 

clothed  in  iron  (armour)/  lie,  the  suppressor  of  the 
malignant,  when  exhilarated  (by  the  Soma  juice), 
cast  the  wily  S'ushna  into  prison  and  into  bonds. 

4.  Divine  strength  waits — like  the  sun  upon  the 
dawn — upon  that  Indra  who  is  made  more  powerful, 
for  protection,  by  thee,  (his  worshipper),  who,  with 
resolute  vigour,  resists  the  gloom,  and  inflicts  severe 
castigation  upon  his  enemies,  making  them  cry 
aloud  (with  pain). 

5.  When  thou,  destroying  Indra,  didst  distribute 
the  (previously)  hidden  life-sustaining,  undecaying 
Avaters  through  the  different  quarters  of  the  heaven, 
then,  animated  (by  the  Soma  juice),  thou  didst  en- 
gage in  battle,  and,  with  exulting  (prowess),  slowest 
Vritra,  and  didst  send  down  an  ocean  of  waters. 

6.  Thou,  mighty  Indra,  sendest  down,  from 
heaven,  by  thy  power,  upon  the  realms  of  earth,  the 
(world)-sustaining  rain.  Exhilarated  (by  the  Soma 
juice),  thou  hast  expelled  the  waters  (from  the 
clouds),  and  hast  crushed  Yritra  by  a  solid  rock." 

SUKTA    VII.    (LYII.) 

Deity,  liishi,  and  metre,  unchanged. 
1.  I  offer  especial  praise  to  the  most  bountiful,  varga  xxii. 

*  Ayasah,  consisting  of  iron;  that  is,  according  to  the  Scho- 
liast, whose  body  is  defended  by  armour  of  ii'on;  showing  the  use 
of  coats  of  mail,  at  this  period,  and  intimating,  also,  a  repre- 
sentation of  the  person  of  Indra,  as  an  image,  or  idol. 

^  Samayd  pdshyd.  The  latter  may  be  either,  with  a  stone  or  a 
spear;  but  the  adjective  samd,  whole,  entire,  seems  to  require  the 
former. 


154  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

the  excellent,  the  opulent,  the  verily  powerful  and 
stately  Indra,  whose  irresistible  impetuosity  is  like 
(the  rush)  of  waters  down  a  precipice,  and  by  whom 
widely-diffused  wealth  is  laid  open  (to  his  wor- 
shippers), to  sustain  (their)  strength. 

2.  All  the  world,  Indra,  was  intent  upon  thy 
worship ;  the  oblations  of  the  sacrificer  (flowed), 
like  water  (falling)  to  a  depth ;  for  the  fatal  golden 
thunderbolt  of  Indra,  when  hurling  it  (against  the 
foe),  did  not  sleep  upon  the  mountain.^ 

3.  Beautiful  Ushas,  now  present  the  oblation,  in 
this  rite,  to  the  formidable,  praise-deserving  Indra, 
whose  all-sustaining,  celebrated,  and  characteristic 
radiance  has  impelled  him  hither ,  and  thither,  (in 
quest)  of  (sacrificial)  food ;  as  (a  charioteer  drives) 
his  horses  (in  various  directions). 

4.  Much-lauded  and  most  opulent  Indra,  we  are 
they  who,  relying  (on  thy  favour),  approach  thee. 
Accepter  of  praise,  no  other  than  thou  receives  our 
commendations.  Do  thou  be  pleased  (with  our 
address) ;   as  the  earth  (cherishes)  her  creatures. 

5.  Great  is  thy  prowess,  Indra.  We  are  thine. 
Satisfy,  Maghavan,  the  desires  of  this  thy  wor- 
shipper. The  vast  heaven  has  acknowledged  thy 
might :  this  earth  has  been  bowed  down  through 
thy  vigour. 

6.  Thou,  thunderer,  hast  shattered,  with  thy  bolt, 
the  broad  and  massive  cloud  into  fragments,  and 

■■  Or  against  the  side  of  Vrilra  ;  that  is,  it  did  not  stop,  until 
it  had  performed  its  office. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA FOUETH    ADHYAYA.  155 

hast  sent  down  the  waters  that  were  confined  in  it,  to 
flow  (at  will).  Verily,  thou  alone  possessest  all  power. 

ANUVAKA  XI. 

St5kta  I.  (LVIII.) 

The  deity  is  Agni  :   the  RisJd,  Xodhas,  the  son  of  Gotama  :   the 
metre  of  the  first  five  verses  is  Jagati ;  of  the  last  four,  TrisMuhh. 

1.  The  strength-generated,  immortal  Agni  quickly  Varga  xxiii. 
issues  forth,  when  he  is  the  invoker  of  the  gods 

and  the  messenger  (of  the  worshipper).  (Then,  pro- 
ceeding) by  suitable  paths,  he  has  made  the  firma- 
ment, and  worships  (the  deities),  in  the  sacrifice, 
with  oblations.^ 

2.  Undecaying  Agni,  combining  his  food''  (with 
his  flame),  and  devouring  it  quickly,  ascends  the 
dry  wood.  The  blaze  of  the  consuming  (element) 
spreads  like  a  (fleet)  courser,  and  roars  like  a  roar- 
ing (cloud)  in  the  height  of  heaven. 

8.  The  immortal  and  resplendent  Agni,  the 
bearer  of  oblations,  honoured'  by  the  Eudras  and 
the  Vasus,  the  invoker  of  the  gods,   who  presides 

"  The  firmament  existed,  but  in  darkness,  until  fii-e,  identified 
with  light,  rendered  it  visible ;  so  that  Agni  may  be  said  to  have 
made  or  created  it — vi  iname,  or  nirmame. 

•*  The  text  has  adma,  food,  or  what  may  be  eaten:  but  the 
Scholiast  explains  it,  trinagulmdcUkam,  straw  and  twigs ;  in  con- 
trast to  atasuj  which  presently  occurs,  and  which  he  explains  by 
hdsMha,  wood  or  timber. 

*^  The  term  is  purohitah,  explained  purashritah,  which  may  also 
imply,  placed  in  front  of,  preceding. 


156  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

over  oblations,  and  is  the  distributor  of  riches, 
praised  by  his  worshippers,  and  admired  like  a 
chariot  amongst  mankind,  accepts  the  oblations  that 
are  successively  presented. 

4.  Excited  by  the  wind,  and  roaring  loudly, 
Agni  penetrates  easily,  with  his  flames  and  diffusive 
(intensity),  among  the  timber.  "When,  undecaying 
and  fiercely-blazing  Agjsti,  thou  rushest  rapidly, 
like  a  bull  amongst  the  forest  trees,  thy  path  is 
blackened. 

5.  The  flame-weaponed  and  breeze-excited  Agni, 
assailing  the  unexhaled  moisture  (of  the  trees)  with 
all  his  strength,  in  a  volume  of  fire,  rushes  tri- 
umphant (against  all  things),  in  the  forest,  like  a 
bull ;  and  all,  whether  stationary  or  moveable,  are 
afraid  of  him,  as  he  flies  along. 

Varga  XXIV.  6.  The  Bhrigus,  amongst  men,  for  the  sake  of  a 
divine  birth, ^  cherished  thee,  like  a  precious  treasure, 
Agni,  who  sacrificest  for  men,  who  art  the  invoker 
(of  the  gods),  the  (welcome)  guest  at  sacrifices,  and 
who  art  to  be  valued  like  an  affectionate  friend. 

7.  I  worship,  with  oblations,  that  Agni,  whom  the 
seven  invoking  priests  invite,  as  the  invoker  of  the 
gods ;  who  is  most  worthy  of  worship  at  sacrifices,  and 
who  is  the  donor  of  all  riches :  I  solicit  of  him  wealth. 

8.  Son  of  strength,  favourably-shining  Agni, 
grant  to  thy  worshippers,  on  this  occasion,  uninter- 
rupted felicity.  Offspring  of  food,  preserve  him  who 
praises  thee  from  sin,  with  guards  of  iron. 


*  Dmjdya  janmane,  for  the  sake  of  being  born  as  gods. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA FOURTH    ADHTAYA.  157 

9.  Variously-shining  Agni,  be  a  shelter  to  him 
who  praises  thee  :  be  prosperity,  Maghavan,^  to  the 
wealthy  (offerers  of  oblations):  protect,  Agni,  thy 
worshipper  from  sin.  May  Agni,  who  is  rich  with 
righteous  acts,  come  (to  us)  quickly  in  the  morning. 


Sl'jKTA  II.  (LIX.) 

The  Rishi  is  Nodhas  ;  the  deity,  Agni,  in  the  form  of  Vatswa- 
NAEA  ;''  the  metre  is  TrisMuhh. 

1.  Whatever  other  fires  there  maybe,  they  are    VargaXXT. 
but  ramifications,  Agni,  of  thee :  but  they  all  re- 
joice, being  immortal,  in  thee.     Thou,  Yaiswanara, 

art  the  navel  of  men,  and  supportest  them,  like  a 
deep-planted  column.'' 

2.  Agni,  the  head  of  heaven,  the  navel  of  earth, 
became  the  ruler  over  both  earth  and  heaven.  All 
the  gods  engendered  thee,  Yaiswanara,  in  the  form 
of  light,  for  the  venerable  sage."* 

■*  This  is  a  very  unusual  appellative  of  Agni,  and  is  a  common 
synonym  of  Indra  ;  although,  in  its  proper  sense  of  a  possessor  of 
riches,  it  may  be  applied  to  either, 

•*  Vaiswdnara ;  from  viswa,  all,  and  nara,  a  man  ;  a  fire  com- 
mon to  all  mankind  ;  or,  as  here  indicated,  the  fire  or  natural  heat 
of  the  stomach,  which  is  a  principal  element  of  digestion. 

°  That  is,  as  a  pillar  or  post,  fixed  firmly  in  the  ground,  sup- 
ports the  main  beam  or  roof  of  a  house. 

^  This  is  the  first  verse  of  a  Tricha,  to  be  recited  at  a  ceremony 
observed  on  the  day  of  the  equinox.  Agni  is  said  to  be  the  head 
of  heaven,  as  the  principal  element,  and  the  navel  of  earth,  as  its 
main  source  of  support.     The  term  drydya  may  apply  either  to 


158  KIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

3.  Treasures  were  deposited  in  the  Agni  Vais- 
WANAEA,  like  the  permanent  rays  (of  light)  in  the 
sun.  Thou  art  the  sovereign  of  all  the  treasures  that 
exist  in  the  mountains,  in  the  herbs,  in  the  waters, 
or  amongst  men. 

4.  lleaven  and  earth  expanded,  as  it  were,  for 
their  son.""  The  experienced  sacrificer  recites,  like 
a  bard,^  many  ancient  and  copious  praises  addressed 
to  the  graceful-moving,  truly  vigorous,  and  all- 
guiding  Vaisw^4nara. 

5.  Yaiswanara,  who  knowest  all  that  are  born, 
thy  magnitude  has  exceeded  that  of  the  spacious 
heaven :  thou  art  the  monarch  of  MANU-descended 
men ;  thou  hast  regained^  for  the  gods,  in  battle,  the 
wealth  (carried  off  by  the  Asuras)." 

6.  I  extol  the  greatness  of  that  showerer  of  rain 
whom  men  celebrate  as  the  slayer  of  Yritra.  The 
Agni  Yaiswanara  slew  the  stealer  (of  the  waters), 
and  sent  them  down  (upon  earth),  and  clove  the 
(obstructing)  cloud."^ 


Manu,  as  the  institutor  of  the  first  sacrifice,  or  to  the  yajamdna, 
the  institutor  of  the  present  rite. 

"■  The  Scholiast  supports  this  affiliation  by  citing  another  text ; 
but  that  does  not  apply  particularly  to  any  form  of  Agni,  but  to 
himseK:  Uhhd  fitard  mahayann  ajdyatdgnir  dydvdprithiv't, — 
Both  parents,  heaven  and  earth,  expanding,  Agni  was  born. 

^  The  text  has  manushya  only,  "  like  a  man  ;"  that  is,  according 
to  the  Scholiast,  a  land'i,  a  panegyrist,  or  bard,  who  recites  the 
praises  of  a  prince  or  great  man,  for  largess. 

'^  This  clause  is  from  the  Scholiast. 

^  We  have  Vaikodnara  here  evidently  identified  with  Tndra  ; 


FIRST    ASHTAKA FOURTH   ADHYATA.  159 

7.  Vaiswanara,  by  his  magnitude,  is  all  men,* 
and  is  to  be  worshipped,  as  the  diffuser  of  manifold 
light,   in  offerings  of  nutritious  viands.''  Agni,  the 

an  identification  not  inconsistent  with  VaidiTc  theogony,  which  re- 
solves all  the  divinities  into  three, — Fire,  Air,  and  the  Sun, 
and  those  three,  again,  into  one,  or  the  Sun  {Niruhta,  VII.,  4). 
But  the  Scholiast  says,  we  are  to  understand  Vaiswdnara,  in 
this  verse,  as  the  Agni  of  the  firmanent,  the  vaidyuta,  the  light- 
ning or  electric  fire.  The  firmament,  or  middle  region,  is,  properly, 
that  of  Vdyu,  the  "Wind,  or  of  Indra  ;  the  inferior  region,  or  earth, 
is  the  proper  sphere  of  Agni ;  and  that  of  the  upper  region,  or 
heaven,  of  the  Sun.  The  Scholiast  cites  a  passage  from  the 
iViVw^^fl!,  YII.,21,in  which  it  is  discussed  who  Vaiswdnara  is,  and 
two  opinions  are  compared, — one,  which  places  him  in  the  middle 
region,  and  identifies  him  with  Indra  or  Vdyu,  or  both,  in  which 
character  he  sends  rain,  an  office  that  the  terrestrial  Agtii  cannot 
discharge ;  and  another,  which  identifies  him  with  Surya,  or  the 
Sun,  in  the  upper  spheie.  Both  are,  however,  considered,  by  the 
Scholiast,  to  be  untenable,  chiefly  from  the  etymologies  of  the 
name,  which  make  Vaiswdnara  an  Agni,  the  fire — as  above  stated 
— of  the  middle  region,  or  lightning ;  from  which,  when  fallen  to 
earth,  the  teri'estrial  fire  is  born,  and  from  which,  also,  the  rain  is 
indirectly  generated,  the  burnt-ofiering  ascending  to  the  sun  ;  and 
it  is,  in  consequence,  from  the  sun  that  rain  descends  :  Vaiswdnara 
is,  therefore,  an  Agni.  According  to  Paurdnik  astronomy,  Vais- 
wdnara is  the  central  path  of  the  sun;  in  mythology,  he  occurs  as 
one  of  the  Ddnams.  The  cloud  is  termed,  in  the  text,  S'amlara, 
who  is,  elsewhere,  called  aj).  Asura. 

^  VisicakrisMi,  literally  rendered,  all  men  :  the  Scholiast  says, 
of  whom  all  men  are  same  nature, — sivahhutdh. 

**  Bharadwdjesh'U, — in  sacrifices  which  present  food  in  the  shape 
of  nutritious  {pusMikara)  oblations  of  clarified  butter  (Jiavis).  Or 
it  may  mean,  wlio  is  to  be  worshipped  by  the  Rishis  termed  Bha- 
radwdjas,  or  of  the  gotra,  or  race,  of  Bharadwdja. 


160  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

speaker  of  truth,  praises,  with  many  commendations, 

PURUNITHA,  the  son  of  S  ATAVANI.^ 


SUKTA  III.    (LX.) 

The  Rishi  is  the  same ;  the  deity  is  Agni  ;  the  metre,  TrisMuhh. 
Vargaxxvi.  1.  Matariswan  hrought,  as  a  friend,  to  Bhrigu," 
the  celebrated  Vahni,  the  illuminator  of  sacrifices, 
the  careful  protector  (of  his  votaries),  the  swift- 
moving  messenger  (of  the  gods),  the  offspring  of 
two  parents,'  (to  be  to  him),  as  it  were,  a  precious 
treasure. 

2.  Both  (gods  and  men)*^  are  the  worshippers  of 

*  These  are  Vaidih  names.  S'atavani  is  so  called,  as  the  offerer 
of  a  hundred,  i.e.,  numerous,  sacrifices  :  his  son  has  the  patro- 
nymic S'dtavaneya. 

^  The  vfind  brought  Agni  to  the  sage  Bhrigu,  as  a  friend  {rdti) : 
some  translate  it  'a  son,'  as  in  the  text,  rdtim  Bhrigundm, — the  son 
of  the  Bhrigtis.  The  more  modern  Sanskrit  confirms  the  first 
sense  ;  as,  although  it  has  lost  the  original  simple  term,  it  preserves 
it  in  the  compound  ardti,  an  enemy,  one  not  (a)  a  friend  (rdti),  an 
unfriend. 

*=  As  before ;  either  of  heaven  and  earth,  or  of  the  two  pieces 
of  wood. 

^  The  text  has  only  ulhaydsak,  "both,"  which  the  Scholiast 
explains,  either  gods  and  men,  or  the  ministering  priests  and  their 
employer, — the  yajamdna.  The  same  authority  would  repeat  the 
phrase  "  gods  and  men,"  as  the  sense  of  the  text  Usijo  ye  cha 
martdh ;  explaining  the  first  by  kdmayamdnd  devdh, — those  who 
are  to  be  wished  for, — the  gods.  He  also  proposes,  as  an  alternative 
for  uiijah,  medhdvinah,  wise,  or  the  priests,  and,  for  mortals,  the 
yajaindnas. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FOURTH   ADHYAYA.  161 

this  ruler, — those  who  are  to  be  desired  (the  gods), 
and  those  who  are  mortal,  bearing  oblations :  for 
this  venerable  invoker  (of  the  gods),  the  lord  of 
men,  and  distributor  (of  desired  benefits),  was  placed, 
by  the  officiating  priests,  (upon  the  altar),  before  the 
sun  was  in  the  sky."* 

3.  May  our  newest  celebration"  come  before  that 
Agni,  who  is  sweet-tongued,  and  is  to  be  engen- 
dered in  the  heart  ;*■  whom  men,  the  descendants  of 
Manus,  sacrificing  and  presenting  oblations  to  him, 
beget,  in  the  time  of  battle/' 

4.  Agni,  the  desirable,  the  purifying,  the  giver 
of  dwellings,  the  excellent,  the  invoker  (of  the 
gods),  has  been  placed  (upon  the  altar),  among  men. 
May  he  be  inimical  (to  our  foes),  the  protector  of 
(our)  dwellings,  and  the  guardian  of  the  treasures  in 
(this)  mansion. 

6.  We,  born  of  the  race  of  Gotama,  praise  thee, 
Agni,  with  acceptable  (hymns),  as  the  lord  of  riches ; 
rubbing  thee,  the  bearer  of  oblations,  as  (a  rider 
rubs  down)  a  horse."     May  he   who   has  acquired 


*  The  priests  conduct  the  Tajamdna  to  the  place  where  the  fire 
has  been  prepared,  before  the  break  of  day,  by  the  Adhwaryu. 

^  Navyas'i  *  *  sulc'irtih ;  as  if  the  hymn  were  of  very  recent  com- 
position. 

'^  Agni,  it  is  said,  is  engendered  of  air :  but  that  air  is  the  vital 
air,  or  breath ;  and  Agni,  therefore,  is  said  to  be  produced  in  the 
heart,  or  in  the  interior  of  the  human  body. 

*  In  order  to  make  burnt-offerings,  to  secure  success. 

®  The  text  has  only  rubbing,  or,  rather,  sweeping,  thee,  as  a 
horse ;  that  is,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  brushing  the  place  of 

15 


162  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

wealth  by  sacred  rites  come  hither,  quickly,  in  the 
morning. 


SuktaIY.  (LXI.) 

The  deity  is  Indea  ;  the  Ilishi  and  metre  are  the  same  as  in  the 
preceding. 

Vargaxxvii.  1.  I  offer  adoration  to  that  powerful,  rapid, 
mighty,  praise-meriting,  and  unobstructed  Indra, — 
adoration  that  is  acceptable,  and  oblations  that  are 
grateful,  as  food  (to  a  hungry  man). 

2.  I  offer  (oblations,  acceptable  as)  food,  (to  the 
hungry,)  to  that  Indra  :  I  raise  (to  him)  exclama- 
tions that  may  be  of  efficacy  in  discomfiting  (my 
foes).  Others  (also,)  worship  Indra,  the  ancient  lord, 
in  heart,  in  mind,  and  in  understanding. 

3.  I  offer,  with  my  mouth,  a  loud  exclamation, 
with  powerful  and  pure  words  of  praise,  to  exalt 
him  who  is  the  type  (of  all,)  the  giver  (of  good 
things),  the  great,  the  wise. 

4.  I  prepare  praises  for  him,  as  a  carpenter  con- 
structs a  car,  (that  the  driver)  may,  thence,  (obtain) 
food,"" — praises  well-deserved,  to  him  who  is  entitled 

the  fire  for  the  burnt-offering, — the  altar,  perhaps, — in  like 
manner  as  persons  about  to  mount  a  horse  rub,  with  their  hands, 
the  part  where  they  arc  to  sit ;  one  inference  from  which  is,  that 
the  early  Hindus  had  no  saddles. 

"•  Ratham  na  tasJit'eva  tatsindya.  Sina,  according  to  the  Nirukta, 
is  a  synonym  of  food  {NiruUa,  V.,  5) :  tat  implies  the  owner  of 
the  car,  "  for  his  food." 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FOURTH   ADHTA.YA.  163 

to  commendation,   and  excellent   oblations   to   the 
wise  Indra. 

5.  To  propitiate  that  Indra,  for  the  sake  of  food, 
I  combine  praise  with  utterance,''  as  (a  man  har- 
nesses) a  horse  (to  a  car),  in  order  to  celebrate  the 
heroic,  munificent,  and  food-conferring  Indra,  the 
destroyer  of  the  cities  (of  the  Asuras). 

6.  For  that  Indra,  verily,  Twashtri  sharpened 
the  well-acting,  sure-aimed  thunderbolt,  for  the 
battle,  with  which  fatal  (weapon)  the  foe-subduing 
and  mighty  sovereign  severed  the  limbs  of  Yritra. 

7.  Quickly  quaffing  the  libations,  and  devouring 
the  grateful  viands  (presented)  at  the  three  (daily) 
sacrifices  which  are  dedicated  to  the  creator  (of  the 
world), ^  he,  the  pervader  of  the  universe,"  stole  the 
ripe  (treasures  of  the  Asuras) :  the  vanquisher  (of 
his  foes),  the  hurler  of  the  thunderbolt,  encounter- 
ing, pierced  the  cloud/ 


^  Arkamjuhwd.  The  latter  is  defined,  the  instrument  of  invoca- 
tion, the  organ  of  speech :  the  former  means,  as  usual,  hymn,  or 
praise  in  metre. 

**  He  may  be  so  termed,  as  everything  in  the  world  proceeds 
from  rain. 

"  The  term  of  the  text  is  Vishnu,  applied  to  Indra,  as  the  per- 
vader of  all  the  world, — sarvasya  jagato  vydpahah. 

^  Vardha,  one  of  the  synonyms  of  megha,  cloud,  in  the 
NighaMu.  Or  it  may  mean  sacrifice,  from  vara,  a  boon,  and  aha, 
a  day.  In  reference  to  this  purport,  a  diff'erent  explanation  of  the 
text  is  given,  which  is  somewhat  obscure.  Vishnu,  it  is  said, 
means  the  personified  sacrifice  {yajna),  in  which  character  he  stole, 
or  attracted,  the  accumulated  wealth  of  the  Asuras  ;  after  which 


XXVIII. 


164  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

8.  To  that  Indea  the  women,  the  wives  of  the 
gods,''  addressed  their  hymns,  on  the  destruction  of 
Ahi.  He  encompasses  the  extensive  heaven  and 
earth.     They  two  do  not  surpass  thy  vastness. 

9.  His  magnitude,  verily,  exceeds  that  of  the 
heaven,  and  earth,  and  sky.  Indea,  self-irradiating 
in  his  dwelling,  equal  to  every  exploit,  engaged 
with  no  unworthy  foe,  and,  skilled  in  conflict,  calls 
to  battle.'' 

10.  Indea,  by  his  vigour,  cut  to  pieces,  with  his 
thunderbolt,  Vritea,  the  absorber  (of  moisture), 
and  set  free  the  preserving  waters,  like  cows  (re- 
covered from  thieves);  and,  consentient  (to  the 
wishes)  of  the  giver  of  the  oblation,  (grants  him) 
food. 


he  remained  concealed  behind  seven  difficult  passes,  or  the  days 
of  initiatory  preparation  for  the  rite.  Indra,  having  crossed  the 
seven  defiles,  or  gone  through  the  seven  days  of  initiation, 
pierced,  or  peneti'ated  to,  or  accomplished,  the  sacrifice.  This  ex- 
planation is  supported  by  a  citation  from  the  Taittiriya,  which  is 
still  more  obscure:  This  Vardha,  the  stealer  of  what  is  beautiful,(?) 
cherishes,  beyond  the  seven  hills,  the  wealth  of  the  Asuras ;  he 
{Indra),  having  taken  up  the  tufts  of  the  sacred  grass,  and  pierced 
the  seven  hills,  slew  him. —  Vardho  ''yam  rumamoshah  sapfdndm 
girmdm  parastdd  vittam  vedyam  asurdndm  hihhartiti ;  sa  darhha- 
pinjulam  uddhritya,  sajyta  gir'in  hhittwd,  tarn  ahann  iti  cha. 

*  The  wives  of  the  gods  are  the  personified  Gdyatri,  and  other 
metres  of  the  Vedas :  according  to  the  Scholiast,  the  term  pidh, 
preceding  devapatn'ih,  usually  means  females,  or  women,  whose 
nature,  the  Scholiast  says,  is  locomotive, — gamanasicabhdvdh. 

^  The  Scholiast  says,  he  calls  the  clouds  to  battle ;  for  by  the 
mutual  collision  of  the  clouds  rain  is  engendered. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA— FOURTH   ADHYAYA.  165 

11.  Through  his  power,  the  rivers  sport ;  since  he  Varga  xxix. 
has  opened  (a  way  for  them,)  by  his  thunderbolt. 
Establishing  his  supremacy,  and  granting  a  (recom'-^' 

pense)  to  the  giver  (of  the  oblation),  he,  the  swift- 
moving,  provided  a  resting-place  for  Turviti.^ 

12.  Indra,  who  art  the  quick-moving  and 
strength-endowed  lord  (of  all),  hurl  thy  thunderbolt 
against  this  Yritra,  and  sever  his  joints,  —  as 
(butchers  cut  up)  a  cow," — that  the  rains  may  issue 
from  him,  and  the  waters  flow  (over  the  earth). 

13.  Proclaim,  with  new  hymns,  the  former  ex- 
ploits of  that  quick-moving  Indra,  when,  wielding 
his  weapons  in  battle,  he  encounters  and  destroys 
his  enemies. 

14.  Through  fear  of  him,  the  stable  mountains 
(are  still) ;  and,  through  dread  of  his  appearance, 
heaven  and  earth  tremble.  May  Kodhas,  praising, 
repeatedly,  the  preserving  power  of  that  beloved 
Indra,  be  speedily  (blessed)  with  vigour. 

15.  To  him  has  that  praise  been  offered  which 
he,  sole  (victor  over  his  foes),  and  lord  of  manifold 


*  The  name  of  a  Rishi,  who,  the  Scholiast  adds,  had  been 
immersed  in  water :  Lidra  brought  him  to  dry  land. 

^  The  text  has,  cut  in  pieces  the  limbs  of  Vritra,  as  of  a  cow, 
{gor  no) :  the  commentator  supplies  the  rest, — as  worldly  men, 
the  carvers  of  flesh,  divide,  here  and  there,  the  limbs  of  animals. 
The  expression  is  remarkable,  although  it  may  not  be  quite  clear 
what  is  meant  by  the  term  used  by  Say  am,  vikartdrah,  cutters-up,» 
or  carvers.  Perhaps  the  word  should  be  vikrcturah,  venders  of  meat, 
butchers.  At  any  rate,  it  proves  that  no  horror  was  attached  to  the 
notion  of  a  joint  of  beef,  in  ancient  days,  among  the  Hindus. 


166  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

wealth,  prefers  (to  receive)  from  those  (who  praise 
him).  Indra  has  defended  the  pious  sacrificer 
Etasa,  when  contending  with   Surya,  the  son  of 

SWASWA.^ 

16.  Indra,  harnesser  of  steeds,  the  descendants 
of  GoTAMA  have  offered,  to  thee,  prayers  of  efficacy, 
to  secure  thy  presence.  Bestow  upon  them  every 
sort  of  affluence.  May  he  who  has  acquired  wealth 
by  pious  acts  come  hither,  quickly,  in  the  morning. 


FIFTH    ADHYAYA. 


ANUVAKA  XI.  (continued). 

SUKTA  V.   (LXII.) 

The  Rishi  is  Nodhas,  and  deity,  Indea,  as  in  the  last ;  the  metre, 
TrisMiibh. 

Varga  I.  ^'  ^^   meditate,    lilve   Angiras,    an    acceptable 

address  to  that  powerful  and  praise-deserving 
Indra,  who  is  to  be  adored,  by  his  worshippers, 
(with  prayers)  of  efficacy,  to  bring  him  to  the  cere- 
mony. Let  us  repeat  a  prayer  to  the  celebrated 
leader  of  all. 

*  The  legend  relates,  that  a  king  named  Swaswa,  or  the  lord  of 
.  good  im)  horses  (aswa),  being   desirous  of  a  son,  worshipped 
Surya,  who,  himself,  was  born  as  the  son  of  the  king.    At  a  sub- 
sequent period,  in  some  dispute  between  him  and  the  Rislii  Etasa, 
Indra  took  part  with  the  latter. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA— FIFTH   ADHYATA.  167 

2.  Do  you,  priests,  offer,  to  the  vast  and  most 
powerful  Indba,  earnest  veneration,  a  chant  fit  to 
be  sung  aloud ;''  for,  through  him,  our  forefathers, 
the  Angirasas,  worshipping  him,  and  knowing  the 
footmarks,  recovered  (the  stolen)  cattle. 

3.  When  the  search  was  set  on  foot  by  Indra 
and  the  Ajstgirasas,  Sarama  secured  food  for  her 
young."  Then  Brihaspati'  slew  the  devourer,  and 
rescued  the  kine  ;  and  the  gods,  with  the  cattle,  pro- 
claimed their  joy  aloud. 

4.  Powerful  Indra,  who  art  to  be  gratified  with 
a  laudatory  and  well-accented  hymn  by  the  seven 
priests,  whether  engaged  for  nine  months,  or  for  ten,*^ 


*  The  expression  is  dngushyam  *  Soma,  a  Sdma  fit  to  be  recited 
aloud, — dglioshymjogyam ;  such  as  the  Rathantaras,  and  other 
prayers,  which  are  usually  considered  portions  of  the  Sdma  Veda. 
But  the  commentator  understands  Sdma,  in  this  place,  to  mean, 
singing  or  chanting  of  the  Richas: — Riksim  yad  gdnam  tasya 
sdmetydhhyd. 

^  When  Indra  desii-ed  the  bitch  Saramd  to  go  in  search  of  the 
stolen  cattle,  she  consented  to  do  so,  only  on  condition  that  the 
milk  of  the  cows  should  be  given  to  her  young  ones,  which  Indra 
promised. 

•=  Brihaspati  is  here  used  as  a  synonym  of  Indra,  the  pro- 
tector or  master  {pati)  of  the  great  ones  (brihatdm), — the  gods. 

''  Sdyana  identifies  the  priests  {vipras)  with  the  Angirasas, 
who,  he  says,  are  of  two  orders, — those  who  conduct  sacrifices  for 
nine  months,  and  those  who  conduct  them  for  ten.  He  cites  the 
Ninikta,  for  the  confinnation  of  this  (XI.,  19) :  but  the  meaningof 
Ydfihas  interpretation  of  the  word  navagwd  is  doubtful,  us  nava- 
gati  may  mean,  '  that  one  whose  course  or  condition  is  new,'  better 
than  '  for  nine.'      Another  explanation  which  he  suggests, — nam- 


168  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

and  desirous  of  (safe)  protection,  thou  hast  terrified, 
by  thy  voice,  the  divisible  fructifying  cloud.'' 

5.  Destroyer  of  foes,  praised  by  the  Angirasas, 
thou  hast  scattered  the  darkness  with  the  dawn 
and  with  the  rays  of  the  sun:  thou  hast  made 
straight  the  elevations  of  the  earth:  thou  hast 
strengthened  the  foundations  of  the  ethereal  region. 
Vargaii.  6.  The  dccds  of  that  graceful  Indra  are  most 
admirable  :  his  exploits  are  most  glorious,  in  that 
he  has  replenished  the  four  rivers^  of  sweet  water, 
spread  over  the  surface  of  the  earth. 

7.  He,  who  is  not  to  be  attained  by  violence,'^  but 
(is  easily  propitiated)  by  those  who  praise  him  with 

n'ltagati, — is  still  less  intelligible,  for  navanUa  usually  means  fresh, 
butter.  The  seven  priests  are  said  to  be  Medhdtithi  and  other 
Rishis  of  the  race  of  Angiraa. 

*  Adrim  *  ■plmligam  *  valam.  The  last  is  here  explained,  cloud; 
the  first,  that  which  is  to  be  divided  by  the  thunderbolt ;  and  the 
second,  that  which  yields  fruit,  or  causes  grain  to  grow  by  its 
rain.  Or  the  three  words  may  be  considered  as  substantives ;  adri 
implying,  as  usual,  a  mountain ;  plialiga,  a  cloud  ;  and  vala,  an 
Asura  ;  all  of  whom  were  terrified  by  Indra^s  voice  or  thunder. 

^  No  specification  of  these  four  is  given,  beyond  their  being  the 
Ganges  and  others. 

"  The  term  aydsya  has  perplexed  the  Scholiast.  It  may  be 
derived  from  ydsa,  effort, — that  which  is  not  attainable  by  effort; 
that  is,  according  to  one  inteq)retation,  not  to  be  overcome  in 
battle  :  whence  Rosen  has  rendered  it  by  invictus.  It  is  contrasted, 
apparently,  with  what  follows,  and  which  requires  the  insertion  of 
susddhya, — easily  to  be  reached,  or  influenced,  by  praises,  and  the 
like.  Other  etymologies  are  suggested;  but  they  are  still  less 
satisfactory. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIFTH   ADHYAYA.  169 

sacred  hymns,  parted  twofold  the  eternal  and 
united  (spheres  of  heaven  and  earth).  The  graceful 
Indra  cherished  the  heaven  and  earth,  like  the  sun 
in  the  august  and  most  excellent  sky. 

8.  (Night  and  dawn),  of  various  complexion,  re- 
peatedly born,  but  ever-youthful,  have  traversed,  in 
their  revolutions,  alternately,  from  a  remote  period, 
earth  and  heaven^ — night,  with  her  dark,  dawn,  with 
her  luminous,  limbs. 

9.  The  son  of  strength,  assiduous  in  good  works, 
diligent  in  pious  acts,  retains  his  ancient  friendship 
(for  his  votary).  Thou,  (Indea,)  providest,  within 
the  yet  immature  cows,  whether  black  or  red,  the 
mature  and  glossy  milk. 

10.  From  a  remote  time  the  contiguous,  un- 
shifting,  and  unwearied  fingers  practise,  with  (all) 
their  energies,  many  thousand  acts  of  devotion  (to- 
wards Iisidea)  ;''  and,  like  the  wives  (of  the  gods), 
the  protecting  sisters^  worship  him  who  is  without 
shame. 


■^  This  seems  to  intimate,  that  the  fingers  were  employed  in  the 
performance  of  what  is,  at  present,  termed  mudrd,  certain  inter- 
twinings  and  gesticulations  accompanying  prayer :  the  commen- 
tary understands  it  as  merely  their  employment  in  acts  of  wor- 
ship or  homage.  That  the  practice  is  not  altogether  modern 
appears  from  the  paintings  of  the  Ajunta  caves,  several  of  the 
persons  of  which  are,  evidently,  performing  the  finger-gesticula- 
tions. 

^  Fatnih  *  swasdrah  may  mean  only  the  protecting  or  propitia- 
toiy  and  moving  epithets  of  avanih,  fingers.  Janmjo  na  is  the  ex- 
pression for  'like  wives  j'  i.e.^  says  Sdyam,  devdndm, — of  the  gods. 


170  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

Varga  III.  11.  Beautiful  Indra,  who  art  to  be  praised  with 
holy  hymns,  the  pious  who  are  desirous  of  holy 
rites,  those  who  are  anxious  for  riches,  and  those 
who  are  wise,  repair  to  thee,  with  veneration. 
Powerful  Indea,  their  minds  adhere  to  thee,  as 
affectionate  wives  to  a  loving  husband. 

12.  Beautiful  Indra,  the  riches  that  have  long 
since  been  held  in  thy  hands  have  suffered  neither 
loss  nor  diminution.  Thou,  Indra,  art  illustrious, 
addicted  to  good  works,  and  resolute.  Enrich  us, 
thou  who  art  diligent  in  action,  by  thy  acts. 

13.  Mighty  Indra,  Nodhas,  the  son  of  Gotama, 
has  composed,  for  us,  this  new  hymn,  (addressed)  to 
thee,  who  hast  been  for  ever,  who  harnessest  thy 
coursers  (to  thy  car),  and  art  the  sure  guide  (of  all). 
May  he  who  has  acquired  wealth  by  pious  acts 
come  hither,  quickly,  in  the  morning. 

SiJkta  VI.  (LXIII.) 
Risliij  deity,  and  metre,  as  before. 
Varga  IV.        1.  Indra,   thou   art   the   mighty    one   who,   be- 
coming manifest  in   (the  hour  of)  alarm,  didst  sus- 
tain, by  thy  energies,  heaven  and   earth."    Then, 
through  fear  of  thee,  all  creatures,  and  the  moun- 

*  The  term  explained,  by  the  Scholiast,  halaih,  by  forces,  or 
strength,  is,  in  the  text,  sushmaih,  the  diiers  up,  that  is,  it  is 
said,  of  enemies.  Of  the  circumstance  alluded  to  we  have  no 
other  explanation  than  that  Indra  became  manifest,  and  sustained 
earth  and  heaven,  when  they  were  filled  with  fear  of  an  Asura. 
Perhaps  Vritra  is  intended  :  but  the  passage  is  obscure. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  171 

tains,  and  all  other  vast  and  solid  things,  trembled, 
like  the  (tremulous)  rays  of  the  sun. 

2.  When,  Indra,  thou  hamessest  thy  variously- 
moving  horses,  thy  praiser  places  thy  thunderbolt 
in  thy  hands,  wherewith,  accomplisher  of  undesired 
acts,''  thou  assailest  thine  enemies,  and,  glorified  by 
many,  destroyest  their  numerous  cities. 

3.  Thou,  Indea,  the  best  of  all  beings,  the 
assailer  and  humiliator  (of  thy  foes),  the  chief  of 
the  RiBHUS,"  the  friend  of  man,  the  subduer  of 
enemies,  didst  aid  the  young  and  illustrious  Kutsa,*^ 
and  slowest  S'ushna,''  in  the  deadly  and  close-fought 
fight. 

4.  Thou,  verily,  didst  animate  him  to  (acquire) 
such  (renown)  as  that  which,  sender  of  rain  and 
wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  thou  (didst  acquire), 
when  thou  slowest  Yritra,  and  when,  munificent 
hero,  who  easily  conquerest  (thy  foes),  thou  didst 
put  to  flight  the  Dasyus^  in  battle. 

*  Aviharyatahratu.  Eosen  has  desideratas  res  faciens  ;  but  the 
Scholiast  has  a/prepsitakarmcm,  that  is,  he  does  actions  undesired 
by  his  foes. 

^  So  the  Scholiast  explains  Rihhuhshu, — Rihhundm  adhipatih :  or 
it  may  mean,  he  who  abides  in  the  Ribhus, — tesJiu  hritanivdsah  :  but 
he  understands  Rihhu,  here,  to  mean  a  wise  man,  a  sage  (medhdvin). 

•^  These  names  have  occurred  before,  in  the  same  relation 
(see  p.  137). 

•*  The  Bast/us  are  described  as  the  enemies  of  Ktitsa, — Kutsa- 
syopakshayatdrah.  Agreeably  to  the  apparent  sense  ofDasyu, — bar- 
barian, or  one  not  Hindu, — Kiitsa  would  be  a  prince  who  bore  an 
active  part  in  the  subjugation  of  the  original  tribes  of  India. 


172  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

5.  Do  thou  J  Indea,  who  art  imwilliug  to  harm 
any  resolute  (mortal),''  set  open  all  the  quarters  (of 
the  horizon)  to  the  horses  of  us  who  praise  thee, 
(when  we  are  exposed)  to  the  aversion  (of  our  ene- 
mies) ;  and,  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  demolish 
our  foes,  as  with  a  club. 
Vaiga  V.  6,  Men  invoke  thee,  such  as  thou  art,  in  the 
thick- thronged  and  wealth-bestowing  conflict.  May 
this  thy  succour,  powerful  Indra,  ever  be  granted, 
in  war,  worthy  to  be  enjoyed  (by  warriors)  in 
battle. 

7.  Indea,  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  warring  on 
behalf  of  Pueukutsa,^  thou  didst  overturn  the  seven 
cities ;  thou  didst  cut  off,  for  Sudas,  the  wealth  of 
Anhu,  as  if  (it  had  been  a  tuft)  of  sacred  grass, 
and  didst  give  it  to  him,  0  king,  ever  satiating  thee 
(with  oblations). 

8.  Increase,  divine  Indea,  for  us,  throughout  the 
earth,  abundant  food, — (that  it  may  be  as  plentiful) 
as  water, — by  which,  hero,  thou  bestowest  upon  us 
(existence),  as  thou  causest  water  to  flow  on  every 
side. 

9.  Praises  have  been  offered  to  thee,  Indea,  by 

"  Even  although  hostile  to  him.  That  is,  Indra  is,  in  himself, 
indifferent  to  those  who  are  opposed  to  him,  and,  if  he  undertakes 
their  destruction,  it  is  not  on  his  own  behalf,  but  in  defence  of  his 
friends  and  worshippers,  as  in  the  case  of  Kutsa,  alluded  to  in 
the  preceding  stanza. 

^  Puruhutsa  is  called  a  Rishi;  Sudds,  a  king  (see  p.  127) ;  and 
Anhu,  an  Asura :  but  no  further  information  is  given  in  the 
comment. 


FIEST   ASHTAKA — FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  173 

the  sons  of  Gotama  :  (they  have  been)  uttered,  with 
reverence,  (to  thee),  borne  (hither)  'by  thy  steeds. 
Grant  us  various  sorts  of  food.  May  he  who  has 
acquired  wealth  by  pious  acts  come  hither,  quickly, 
in  the  morning. 

SUKTA    VII.    (LXIV.) 

The  Rishi  is  the  same ;  the  deities  are  the  Maruts,  collectively  ; 
the  metre  is  Jagati,  except  ia  the  last  verse,  in  which  it  is 
Trisht'uhh. 

1.  Offer,  IN'oDHAS,  earnest  praise  to  the  company    VargaVl. 
of  the  Maruts,  the  senders  of  rain  and  ripeners  of 

fruit,  deserving  of  adoration.  Composed,  and  with 
folded  hands,  I  utter  the  praises  conceived  in  my 
mind,  which  are  efficacious  in  sacred  rites,  (and 
flow  readily)  as  the  waters. 

2.  They  were  born,  handsome  and  vigorous,  from 
the  sky,  the  sons  of  Eudra,''  the  conquerors  of  their 
foes,  pure  from  sin,  and  purifying  (all),  radiant  as 
suns,  powerful  as  evil  spirits,"  diffusers  of  rain-drops, 
and  of  fearful  forms. 

*  Rudrasya  marydh  ;  literally,  the  mortals,  or  men,  of  Rudra. 
But  the  Scholiast  observes,  the  Maruts  are  immortal ;  and  the  tenn 
must,  therefore,  imply  sons,  agreeably  to  another  text,  A  te  pilar 
Marutdm  sumnam  etu, — May  he  obtain  thy  favour,  father  of  the 
Maruts;  [II.,  XXXIII.,  1  :  see  Vol.  II.,  p.  289]  or,  as  in 
stanza  twelve,  where  the  Maruts  are  called,  collectively,  Ru- 
drasya  sunuh, — the  son  of  Rudra. 

^  Satwdno  na.  Satwdnah  is  explained,  Parameswarasya  hhiiia- 
gaiiah, — the  troop  of  demons  attendant  on  Parameswara  or  S'ka. 


174  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA, 

3.  Youthful  EuDRASj  and  undecaying,  destruc- 
tive of  those  who  do  not  worship  (the  gods),  of  un- 
obstructed progress,  and  immoveable  as  mountains, 
they  are  desirous  of  granting  (the  wishes  of  the 
worshipper),  and,  by  their  strength,  agitate  all  sub- 
stances, whether  of  heaven  or  of  earth. 

4.  They  decorate  their  persons  with  various  or- 
naments; they  have  placed,  for  elegance,  brilliant 
(garlands)  on  their  breasts;  lances  are  borne  upon 
their  shoulders,  and,  with  them  and  their  own 
strength,  have  they  been  born,  leaders,  from  the 
sky. 

5.  Enriching  their  worshipper,  agitating  the 
clouds,  devourers  of  foes,  they  create  the  winds 
and  lightnings  by  their  power.  The  circumambient 
and  agitating  Maeuts  milk  heavenly  udders,  and 
sprinkle  the  earth  with  the  water. 

Vavga  VII.  6.  The  munificent  Maruts  scatter  the  nutritious 
waters,  as  priests,  at  sacrifices,  the  clarified  butter. 
As  grooms  lead  forth  a  horse,  they  bring  forth,  for 
its  rain,  the  fleet-moving  cloud,  and  milk  it,  thun- 
dering and  unexhausted. 

7.  Vast,  possessed  of  knowledge,  bright-shining, 
like  mountains  in  stability,  and  quick  in  motion, 
you,  like  elephants,  break  down  the  forests,  when 
you  put  vigour  into  your  ruddy  (mares). 

8.  The  most  wise  Maruts  roar  like  lions  :  the  all- 
knowing  are  graceful  as  the  spotted  deer,  destroy- 
ing (their  foes),  delighting  (their  worshippers)  :  of 
deadly  strength   in   their  anger,  they  come,   with 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  175 

their  antelopes/  and  their  arms,  (to  defend  the 
sacrificer)  against  interruption. 

9.  Maeuts,  who  are  distinguished  in  troops,  who 
are  benevolent  to  men,  who  are  heroes,  and  whose 
strength  is  deadly  in  your  anger,  you  make  heaven 
and  earth  resound  (at  your  coming)  ;  your  (glory) 
sits  in  the  seat-furnished  chariots,  conspicuous  as  (a 
beautiftd)  form,  or  as  the  lovely  lightning. 

10.  The  Maeuts,  who  are  all-knowing,  co- 
dwellers  with  wealth,  combined  with  strength, 
loud-sounding,  repellers  of  foes,  of  infinite  prowess, 
whose  weapon  (of  offence)  is  Indea,  and  who  are 
leaders  (of  men),  hold,  in  their  hands,  the  shaft. 

11.  Augmenters  of  rain,  they  drive,  with  golden  Varga  viir, 
wheels,  the  clouds  asunder;  as  elephants"  (in  a  herd, 

break  down  the  trees  in  their  way).  They  are 
honoured  with  sacrifices,  visitants  of  the  hall  of 
offering,  spontaneous  assailers  (of  their  foes),  sub- 
verters  of  what  are  stable,  immoveable  themselves, 
and  wearers  of  shining  weapons. 

12.  We  invoke,  with  praise,  the  foe-destroying, 
all-purifying,  water-shedding,  all-surveying  band 
of  Maeuts,   the  offspring  of  Kudea.     (Priests),    to 


*  Prishat'ibhih,  with  the  spotted  deer,  which  are  the  vdhanas,  or 
steeds,  of  the  Ifaruts. 

^  Apathyo  na;  literally,  "  like  that  which  is  produced,  or  occurs, 
on  the  road,"  leaving  a  wide  range  for  explanation.  Sdyana, 
therefore,  proposes  another  meaning  :  "  like  a  chariot  which  drives 
over  and  crushes  sticks  and  straws  on  the  way." 


176  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

obtain  prosperity,  have  recourse  to  the  dust- 
raising  and  powerful  band  of  Maruts,  receiving 
libations  from  sacred  vessels,''  and  showering  down 
(benefits). 

13.  The  man  whom,  Maruts,  you  defend,  with 
your  protection,  quickly  surpasses  all  men  in 
strength:  with  his  horses,  he  acquires  food,  and, 
with  his  men,  riches  :  he  performs  the  required 
worship  ;  and  he  prospers. 

14.  MarutSj  grant  to  your  wealthy  (worshippers, 
a  son),^  eminent  for  good  works,  invincible  in  battle, 
illustrious,  the  annihilator  (of  his  adversaries),  the 
seizor  of  wealth,  the  deserver  of  praise,  and  all- 
discerning.  May  we  cherish  such  a  son,  and  such  a 
grandson,  for  a  hundred  winters. 

15.  Grant  us,  Maruts,  durable  riches,  attended 
by  posterity,  and  mortifying  to  our  enemies, — 
(riches)  reckoned  by  hundreds  and  thousands,  and 
ever  -  increasing.  May  they  who  have  acquired 
wealth  by  pious  acts  come  hither,  quickly,  in  the 
morning. 

'^  Rij'ishinam,  which.  Rosen  renders  hostes  vincentem,  and 
M.  Langlois,  vidorieuse :  but  the  commentary  offers  no  such 
signification.  The  Maruts,  it  is  said,  arc  worshipped  at  the  third 
or  evening  ceremonial,  according  to  the  text.  Rij'isham  abhishun- 
xuanti, — "  They  (the  priests)  pour  the  Soma }mcQ  into  the  vessel." 
Risfiham,  in  its  ordinary  sense,  is  a  frying-pan ;  but  here  it  may 
mean  any  sacrificial  vessel. 

''  Putra,  son,  is  supplied  by  the  comment :  the  concluding 
phrases  authorize  the  addition. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIFTH  ADHYAYA.  177 

ANUVAKA  XII. 

SUKTA    I.    (LXV.) 

The  deity  is  Agni  ;  the  Rishi,  Pakasaea,  son  of  S'akti,  the  son 
of  Vasisht HA  ;  the  metre  is  termed  Dwipadd  Virdt'.^ 

1.  The  firm  and  placid  divinities  followed  thee,    Varga  ix. 
Agni,  by  thy  foot-marks,  when  hiding  in  the  hollow 

(of  the  waters),''  like  a  thief  (who  has  stolen)  an 
animal, — thee,  claiming  oblations,  and  bearing  them 
to  the  gods.  All  the  deities  who  are  entitled  to 
worship  sit  down  near  to  thee. 

2.  The  gods  followed  the  traces  of  the  fugitive  : 
the  search  spread  everywhere,  and  earth  became 
like  heaven :  the  waters  swelled,  (to  conceal  him), 
who  was  much  enlarged  by  praise,  and  was  mani- 
fested, as  it  were,  in  the  womb  in  the  waters,  the 
source  of  sacrificial  food." 

3.  Agni  is  grateful  as  nourishment,  vast  as  the 
earth,  productive  (of  vegetable  food),  as  a  mountain. 


"■  Each  stanza  is  divided  into  half;  and  each  two  padas  are 
considered  as  forming  a  complete  stanza :  hence  this  hymn  and 
the  five  following  are  said  to  be  dasarcha,  or  to  have  ten  stanzas- 
each ;  whilst,  in  fact,  they  have  only  five. 

"  Guhd  chatantam.  The  first  term,  usually,  'a  cave,'  is  said  to 
apply  either  to  the  depth  of  the  waters,  or  to  the  hollow  of  the 
AsivaUha  tree,  in  both  of  which  Agni  hid  himself  for  a  season. 

•^  A  fish  revealed  to  the  gods  where  Agni  had  hidden;  as, 
according  to  the  Taittiriyas,  "  He,  concealing  himself,  entered 
into  the  waters :  the  gods  wished  for  a  messenger  to  him  :  a  fish 
discovered  him," — Saniluyata,  so  ^pah  prdvisat:  tarn  derdh  2)rai' 
sham  aichchhan  :  tarn  matsyah  prdbrav'it. 

16 


178  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

delightful  as  water :  he  is  like  a  horse  urged  to  a 
charge  in  battle,  and  like  flowing  waters/  Who  can 
arrest  him  ? 

4.  He  is  the  kind  kinsman  of  the  waters,  like  a 
brother  to  his  sisters :  he  consumes  the  forest,  as  a 
Raj'd  (destroys)  his  enemies  :  when  excited  by  the 
wind,  he  traverses  the  woods,  and  shears  the  hairs 
of  the  earth.^ 

5.  He  breathes  amidst  the  waters,  like  a  sitting 
swan :  awakened  at  the  dawn,  he  restores,  by  his 
operations,  consciousness  to  men  :  he  is  a  creator, 
like  Soma  f  born  from  the  waters,  (where  he 
lurked,)  like  an  animal  with  coiled-up  limbs,  he 
became  enlarged ;  and  his  light  (spread)  afar. 


^  The  epithets  are,  in  the  text,  attached  to  the  objects  of  com- 
parison, although  equally  applicable  to  Agni :  thus,  he  is  pusht'ir 
na  ranicd, — like  grateful  nourishment ;  hshitir  na  prithw'i, — like 
the  vast  earth  ;  &c.  Several  of  the  comparisons  admit  of  various 
interpretations ;  as  the  first  may  signify  the  increase  of  desired 
fruits  or  rewards,  as  the  consequence  of  sacrifices  with  fire  :  in  no 
case  does  it  import  the  frugum  maturitas  of  Rosen. 

^  The  fruit,  flowers,  grasses,  shrubs,  and  the  like,  termed,  iu  the 
text,  roind  prithivydh. 

"  Somo  na  vedhdh ;  in  like  manner  as  Soma  creates  or  causes 
useful  plants  to  grow,  so  Agni  creates,  or  extracts  from  them, 
their  nutritive  faculty.  The  Agni  here  alluded  to  is  the  fire  of 
digestion,  the  heat  of  the  stomach :  Agnir  annddo  \napatih, — 
Agni  is  the  eater  and  sovereign  of  food ;  and,  in  the  Vdjasaneyi 
Yajus/i,  we  have  Etdvad  vd  idam  annam  cJiaivdnnddas  cha  Soma 
evdnnam  Agnir  annddah, — Inasmuch  as  there  is  food  and  feeder, 
60  Soma  is  the  food,  and  the  feeder  is  Agni. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIFTH   ADHYAYA.  179 

SUKTA    II.    (LXVI.) 

Deity,  Rkhi,  and  metre,  the  same. 

1.  Agni,  who  is  like  wondrous  wealth,  like  the     ^'arga  x. 
all-surveying   Sun,  like  vital  breath,  like   a   well- 
conducted  son,  like   a   rider-bearing   steed,   like  a 
milk-yielding   cow,  who  is  pure  and  radiant,  con- 
sumes the  forests. 

2.  Like  a  secure  mansion,  he  protects  property: 
he  (nourishes  people),  like  barley  :  he  is  the  con- 
queror of  (hostile)  men  :  he  is  like  a  JRishi,  the 
praiser  (of  the  gods),  eminent  amongst  (devout) 
persons.  As  a  spirited  horse  (goes  to  battle),  he 
repairs,  delighted,  to  the  hall  of  sacrifice.  May  he 
bestow  upon  us  food. 

3.  Agni,  of  unattainable  brightness,  is  like  a 
vigilant  sacrificer : '  he  is  an  ornament  to  all  (in  the 
sacrificial  chamber),  like  a  woman  in  a  dwelling. 
"When  he  shines,  with  wonderful  lustre,  he  is  like  the 
white  (sun),  or  like  a  golden  chariot  amongst  men, 
resplendent  in  battle. 

4.  He  terrifies  (his  adversaries),  like  an  army 
sent  (against  an  enemy),  or  like  the  bright- 
pointed  shaft  of  an  archer.  Agni,  as  Yama,  is 
all  that  is  born ;    as  Yama,   all  that  will  be  born.'' 

*  As  the  performer  of  a  sacrifice  takes  care  that  nothing 
vitiates  the  rite,  so  Agni  deknds  it  from  interruption  by  BdhJiasas. 

^  Yamo  hajdto,  yamo  janihcam,  is  the  phraseology  of  tlie  text, 
and  is  somewhat  obscure.  According  to  the  Scholiast,  yama,  here, 
has  its  etymological  purport  only,  "he  who  gives  the  desired  object 


180  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

He    is    the    lover    of    maidens,''  the    husband    of 
wives,^ 

5.  Let  us  approach  that  bhizing  Agni  with 
animal  and  vegetable  offerings,''  as  cows  hasten  to 
their  stalls.  He  has  tossed  about  his  flames  (in 
every  direction),  like  running  streams  of  water: 
the  rays  commingle  (with  the  radiance)  visible  in 
the  sky. 


tothewovsh{^T^eY8,^'-~9/achchhatidaddtisiotribhyahMmdn,in'which. 
sense  it  is  a  synonym  of  Apit, — yamo'gnir  iichyate.  Or  it  may  be 
applied  to  him  as  one  of  the  twins  {yama),  from  the  simultaneous 
birth  of  Indra  and  Agni,  according  to  YdsJca.  Jdta  is  said  to 
imply  all  existing  beings ;  janitwa,  those  that  will  exist :  both  are 
identical  with  Agni,  as  Yama,  from  the  dependence  of  all  existence, 
past,  present,  or  future,  upon  worship  with  fire. 

*  Because  they  cease  to  be  maidens,  when  the  offering  to  fire, 
the  essential  part  of  the  nuptial  ceremony,  is  completed. 

^  The  wife  bearing  a  chief  part  in  oblations  to  fire.  Or  a  legend 
is  alluded  to,  of  Soma,  who,  having  obtained — it  does  not  appear 
how — a  maiden,  gave  her  to  the  Gandharva  Viswdvasu :  he  trans- 
ferred her  to  Agni,  who  gave  her  to  a  mortal  husband,  and  be- 
stowed upon  her  wealth  and  offspring .  The  whole  of  this  stanza 
is  similarly  commented  upon  in  the  NiruUa,  X.,  21, 

°  So  the  Commentator  explains  the  terms  clmrdthd  and  vasatyd, 
invocations  prompted  by  minds  purified  by  offerings  of  moveable 
things,  that  is,  animals ;  or  of  immoveable  things,  as  rice,  and  the 
like  :  tatprabliavair  hridayddihhih  sddhydhufik ;  or,  paSuprabhava- 
hridayddisddJtanaydhutyd. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIFTH   ADHYAYA.  181 


SUKTA  III.    (LXVII.) 

The  same  deity,  RisJd,  and,  metre,  continued. 

1.  Born  in  the  woods,  the  friend  of  man,  Agni    Varga  xi. 
protects  his  worshipper,  as  a  Ruj'd  favours  an  able 

man.  Kind  as  a  defender,  prosperous  as  a  performer 
of  (good)  works,  may  he,  the  invoker  of  the  gods, 
the  bearer  of  oblations,''  be  propitious. 

2.  Holding,  in  his  hand,  all  (sacrificial)  wealth, 
and  hiding  in  the  hollows  (of  the  waters),  he  filled 
the  gods  with  alarm.  The  leaders,  (the  gods),  the 
upholders  of  acts,  then  recognize  Agni,  when  they 
have  recited  the  prayers  conceived  in  the  heart. 

3.  Like  the  unborn  (sun),  he  sustains  the  earth 
and  the  firmament,  and  props  up  the  heaven  with 
true  prayers."  Agni,  in  whom  is  all  sustenance, 
cherish  the  places  that  are  grateful  to  animals ; 
repair  (to  the  spots)  where  there  is  no  pasturage.'^ 

*  Savyavdh,  here  used  generally,  is,  properly,  the  bearer  of 
oblations  to  the  gods ;  the  Veda  recognizing,  besides  the  usual 
fires,  three  Agnis  :  Savyavdh  ox  Havyavdhana,  that  which  conveys 
offerings  to  the  gods;  Kavyavdh,  which  conveys  them  to  the  Pitris, 
or  Manes;  and  SaharaJcshas,  that  which  receives  those  offered 
to  the  Rdlcshasas. 

^  According  to  the  Taittir'iyas,  the  gods,  alarmed  at  the 
obliquity  of  the  region  of  the  sun,  and  fearing  that  it  might  fall, 
propped  it  up  with  the  metres  of  the  Veda, — an  act  here  attributed 
to  Agni. 

°  Guild  guham  gah.  Rosen  has  de  specu  in  specum  procedas  ; 
but  guhd  here  means,  apparently,  any  arid  or  rugged  tract  unfit 


182  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

4.  He  who  knows  Agni,  hidden  in  the  hollows ; 
he  who  approaches  him,  as  the  maintainor  of  truth ; 
those  who,  performing  worship,  repeat  his  praises ; 
to  them,  assuredly,  he  promises  affluence. 

5.  The  wise,  (first)  honouring  Agni,  as  they  do  a 
dwelling,'^  worship  him  who  imjDlants  their  (peculiar) 
virtues  in  herbs,  as  progeny  in  their  parents,  and 
who,  the  source  of  knowledge  and  of  all  sustenance, 
(abides)  in  the  domicile  of  the  waters. 

Si5kta  IV.  (LXVIII.) 

The  ^isJii,  &c.,  unchanged. 

Varga  XII.  1-  The  boaror  (of  the  oblations),  (Agni),  mixing 
them  (with  other  ingredients),  ascends  to  heaven, 
and  clothes  all  things,  moveable  and  immoveable," 
and  the  nights  themselves,  (with  light),  radiant 
amongst  the  gods,  and,  in  himself  alone,  compre- 
hending the  virtues  of  all  these  (substances).'^ 

2.  When,  divine  Agni,   thou   art   born,    living, 

for  pasture,  or,  as  the  commentary  says,  sanchdrdyogyadhdnam, 
— a  place  unfit  for  grazing,  and  which  Agni  may,  therefore, 
scoi'ch  up  with  impunity. 

"■  In  huilding  a  house,  worship  is  first  offered  to  the  edifice ; 
and  it  is  then  put  to  use.  So,  Agni  is  to  be  fii'st  adored,  and  then 
employed  in  any  sacrificial  rites. 

''  That  is,  the  world,  made  up  of  moveable  and  immoveable 
things. 

•^  Or  it  maybe  rendered,  he  alone  surpasses  the  glories  {mahitwd) 
of  all  these  gods;  as  Eosen  has  it,  excelUt  deus  deorum  mag- 
nittidine. 


FIRST  ASHTAKA — FIFTH   ADHYAYA.  183 

from  the  dry  wood,  (by  attrition),  then  all  (thy 
worshippers)  perform  the  sacred  ceremony,  and 
obtain,  verily,  true  divinity,  by  praising  thee,  who 
art  immortal,  with  hymns  that  reach  thee. 

3.  Praises  are  addressed  to  him  who  has  repaired 
(to  the  solemnity) ;  oblations  (are  offered)  to  him 
who  has  gone  (to  the  sacrifice) ;  in  him  is  all  sus- 
tenance ;  (and  to  him)  have  all  (devout  persons) 
performed  (the  customary)  rites.  Do  thou,  Agni, 
knowing  (the  thoughts  of  the  worshipper),  grant 
riches  to  him  who  presents  to  thee  oblations,  or 
who  wishes  (to  be  able  to  present  them). 

4.  Thou  hast  abided  with  the  descendants  of 
Manu,"*  as  the  invoker  (of  the  gods)  :  thou  art, 
indeed,  the  lord  of  their  possessions.  They  have 
desired  (of  thee)  procreative  vigour  in  their  bodies ; 
and,  associated  with  their  own  excellent  offspring, 
they  contemplate  (all  things),  undisturbed. 

6.  Hastening  to  obey  the  commands  of  Agni, 
like  sons  (obedient  to  the  orders)  of  a  father,  they 
celebrate  his  worship.  Abounding  in  food,  Agni  sets 
open,  before  them,  treasures  that  are  the  doors  of 
sacrifice ;  and  he  who  delights  in  the  sacrificial 
chamber  has  studded  the  sky  with  constellations. 

SUKTA   y.    (LXIX.) 

The  same  as  the  preceding. 
1.  White-shining  (Agni),  like  the  (sun),  the  ex- 
tinguisher of  the  dawn,  is  the  illuminator  (of  all), 


Varffa  XIII. 


*  AVith  mankind. 


184  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

and  fills  united  (heaven  and  earth  with  light), 
like  the  lustre  of  the  radiant  (sun).  Thou,  as  soon 
as  manifested,  hast  pervaded  all  the  world  with 
devout  acts,  being  (both)  the  father  and  son  of  the 
gods.^ 

2.  The  wise,  the  humble,  and  discriminating 
Agni  is  the  giver  of  flavour  to  food ;  as  the  udder 
of  cows  (gives  sweetness  to  the  milk).  Invited  (to 
the  ceremony),  he  sits  in  the  sacrificial  chamber, 
difi'using  happiness,  like  a  benevolent  man,  amongst 
mankind. 

3.  He  diffuses  happiness  in  a  dwelling,  like  a  son 
(newly)  born ;  he  overcomes  (opposing)  men,  like  an 
animated  charger.  Whatever  (divine)  beings  I  may, 
along  with  other  men,  invoke  (to  the  ceremony), 
thou,  Agni,  assumest  all  (their)  celestial  natures." 

4.  Never  may  (malignant  spirits)  interrupt  those 
rites  in  which  thou  hast  given  the  (hope  of)  reward 
to  the  persons  (who  celebrate  them) ;  for,  should 
(such  spirits)  disturb  thy  worship,  then,  assisted  by 

^  Devdndm  pita  putrah  san.  The  passage  is  also  explained,  the 
protector,  either  of  the  gods,  or  of  the  priests  (r/^«^2)a???.),  and  their 
messenger,  that  is,  at  their  command,  like  a  son :  but  the  expres- 
sions are,  probably,  to  be  used  in  their  literal  sense,  with  a 
metaphorical  application.  Agni,  as  the  bearer  of  oblations,  may 
be  said  to  give  paternal  support  to  the  gods  ;  whilst  he  is  their 
son,  as  the  presentex',  to  them,  of  sacrificial  offerings. 

'^  I.e.,  tattaddevatdrupo  Ihavati, — he  becomes  of  the  form,  or 
nature,  of  that  deity  ;  as  in  the  text  Tivam  Agne  Varurio  jdyase, 
yat  tivam  ILitro  Ihavasi,  Sfc, — Thou  art  born  as  Varuna,  thou 
becomest  Mitra.     [V.  Ill,,  1 :  see  Vol.  III.,  p.  237.] 


FIRST   ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  185 

followers  like  thyself,"  thou  puttest  the  intruders  to 
flight. 

5.  May  Agni,  who  is  possessed  of  manifold  light, 
like  the  extinguisher  of  the  dawn,*"  the  granter  of 
dwellings,  and  of  cognizable  foTm,  consider  (the 
desires  of)  this  (his  worshipper).  (His  rays),  spon- 
taneously bearing  the  oblation,  open  the  doors  (of 
the  sacrificial  chamber),  and,  all,  spread  through  the 
visible  heaven. 

Si5kta  VI.  (LXX.) 
Rishi,  &c.  as  before. 

1.  We  solicit  abundant  (food).     Agni,  who  is  to  VargaXiv 
be  approached  by  meditation,  and  shines  with  pure 

light,  pervades  all  holy  rites,  knowing  well  the  acts 
that  are  addressed  to  the  deities,  and  (those  which 
regulate)  the  birth  of  the  human  race. 

2.  (They  offer  oblations)  on  the  mountain,  or  in 
the  mansion,  to  that  Agni,  who  is  within  the  waters, 
within  woods,"  and  within  all  moveable  and  immove- 
able things,  immortal,  and  performing  pious  acts, 
like  a  benevolent  (prince)  among  his  people. 

*  Samdnair  nrihhih, — with  equal  leaders,  or  men ;  that  is,  with 
the  3Iarufs. 

^  This  phrase  is,  here,  as  well  as  in  the  first  verse,  tcsho  na 
jdrah;  the  latter  being  explained  by  jardijitri,  the  causer  of 
decay.     The  sun  obliterates  the  dawn  by  his  superior  radiance. 

"  He  is  the  garhha,  the  embryo,  the  internal  germ  of  heat 
and  life,  in  the  waters,  &c.,  all  which  depend,  for  existence,  upon 
natural  or  artificial  warmth. 


186  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

3.  Agni,  the  lord  of  night,  ^  grants  riches  to  (the 
worshipper)  who  adores  him  with  sacred  hymns. 
Agni,  who  art  omniscient,  and  knowest  the  origin 
of  gods  and  men,  protect  all  these  (beings  dwelling) 
upon  earth. 

4.  Agni,  whom  many  variously-tinted  (mornings) 
and  nights  increase,  whom,  invested  with  truth,  all 
moveable  and  immoveable  things  augment,  has 
been  propitiated,  and  is  kindly  seated  at  the  holy 
rite,  as  the  invoker  (of  the  gods),  and  rendering  all 
(pious)  acts  (productive)  of  reward. 

5.  Agni,  confer  excellence  upon  our  valued 
cattle  ;  and  may  all  men  bring  us  acceptable  tribute. 
Offering,  in  many  places,  sacrifices  to  thee,  men  re- 
ceive riches  from  thee,  as  (sons)  from  an  aged 
father. 

6.  (May  Agni),  who  is  like  one  who  succeeds  (in 
his  undertakings),  and  acquires  (what  he  wishes 
for),  who  is  like  a  warrior  casting  a  dart,  and  re- 
sembles a  fearful  adversary,  who  is  brilliant  in 
combats,  (be,  to  us,  a  friend). 

*  KsJiapdvat, — ^having,  or  possessing,  the  night,  as  then  espe- 
cially bright  and  illuminating ;  as  the  text,  Agneyi  vai  rdtrih, — 
Night  is  characterized  by  Agni.  So,  also,  in  one  of  the  mantras  of 
the  Agnyddlicya  ceremony,  we  have,  Agnir  jyotir,  jyotir  Agnih 
sivuhd  ( Vdjasaneya  Sanhitd,  p.  64).  Or  the  term  may  be  rendered, 
also,  "capable  of  destroying "  (the  Edkshasas). 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIFTH   ADHTAYA.  187 


Si5kta  VII.  (LXXI.) 
The  deity  and  Rishi  are  the  same ;  but  the  metre  is  Trislit'ulh. 

1 .  The  contiguous  fingers,  loving  the  affectionate  Varga  xv. 
Agni,  as  wives  love  their  own  husbands,  please  him 

(with  offered  oblations),  and  honour  him,  who  is 
entitled  to  honour,  (with  gesticulations),  as  the  rays 
of  light  (are  assiduous  in  the  service)  of  the  dawn, 
which  is  (at  first,)  dark,  (then,)  glimmering,  and 
(finally,)  radiant. 

2.  Our  forefathers,  the  Angirasas,  by  their 
praises  (of  Agni),  terrified  the  strong  and  daring 
devourer,  (Pani),  by  the  sound.  They  made,  for  us, 
a  path  to  the  vast  heaven,  and  obtained  accessible 
day,  the  ensign  of  day,""  (Aditya),  and  the  cows 
(that  had  been  stolen). 

3.  They  secured  him,  (x^gxi,  in  the  sacrificial 
chamber) ;  they  made  his  worship  the  source  of 
wealth;^  whence  opulent  votaries  preserve  his  fires, 
and  practise  his  rights.  Free  from  all  (other)  desire, 
assiduous  in  his  adoration,  and  sustaining  gods 
and  men  by  their  offerings,  they  come  into  his 
presence.'^ 

*  Ketu,  the  indicator  or  causer  of  day  being  known ;  that  is, 
according  to  the  Scholiast,  Aditya,  the  Sun. 

^  Ari/ah,  explained  dhanasya  swdminah.  It  does  not  appear 
why  Rosen  renders  it  matrons. 

"  This  and  the  preceding  stanza  are  corroborative  of  the  share 
borne,  by  the  Angirasas,  in  the  organization,  if  not  in  the  ori- 
gination, of  the  worship  of  Fire. 


188  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

4.  When  the  diffusive  vital  air''  excites  Agni, 
he  becomes  bright  and  manifest^  in  every  mansion  ; 
and  the  institutor  of  the  rite,  imitating  Bhrigu, 
prevails  on  him  to  perform  the  function  of  messen- 
ger ;  as  a  prince  who  has  become  a  friend  sends  an 
ambassador  to  his  more  powerful  (conqneror)/ 

5.  When  (the  worshipper)  offers  an  oblation  to 
his  great  and  illustrious  protector,  the  grasping 
(Rakshas),  recognizing  thee,  Agni,  retires  :  but 
Agni,  the  archer,  sends  after  him  a  blazing  arrow 
from  his  dreadful  bow ;  and  the  god  bestows  light 
upon  his  own  daughter,  (the  dawn). 

Vargaxvi.         6.  When  (the  worshipper)  kindles   thee    in  his 

Mdtariswan  is  a  common  name  of  Vdyu,  or  Wind ;  but  it  is 
here  said  to  mean  the  principal  vital  air  [innlhjaprdna),  divided 
{I'ihrita)  into  the  five  airs  so  denominated,  as  in  a  dialogue 
between  them,  cited  by  the  Scholiast:  "To  them  said  the 
Arisht'a  breath,  *  Be  not  astonished ;  for  I,  having  made  myself 
five-fold,  and  having  arrested  the  arrow,  sustain  (life).'  " 

^  Jeni/a,  from j'ana,  to  be  born  ;  or  it  may  be  derived  from/;', 
to  conquer,  and  be  rendered  '  victorious ; '  as,  according  to  the 
Taittir'iyas,  "  the  gods  and  Asuras  were  once  engaged  in  combat : 
the  former,  being  alarmed,  entered  into  fire :  therefore,  they  call 
Agni  all  the  gods,  who,  having  made  him  their  shield,  overcame 
the  Asuras^  So,  in  the  Aitareya  Brdhmana,  "the  gods,  having 
awoke  Agni,  and  placed  him  before  them,  at  the  morning  sacrifice, 
repulsed,  with  him  in  their  van,  the  Asuras  and  RdhsTiasas,  at  the 
morning  rite." 

"  This  expresses  a  notion  still  current  amongst  the  nations  of 
the  East,  that  the  mission  of  an  envoy  to  a  foreign  prince  is  an 
acknowledgment  of  the  latter's  superiority. 


FIEST   ASHTAKA— FIFTH   ADHYAYA.  189 

own  dwelling,  and  presents  an  oblation  to  thee, 
daily  desiring  it,  do  thou,  Agni,  augmented  in  two 
ways,  (as  middling,  and  as  best),  increase  his  means 
of  sustenance.  May  he  whom  thou  sendest  with  his 
car  to  battle  return  with  wealth. 

7.  All  (sacrificial)  viands  concentrate  in  Agni,  as 
the  seven  great  rivers  flow  into  the  ocean.''  Our 
food  is  not  partaken  of  by  our  kinsmen  :  ^  therefore, 
do  thou,  who  knowest  (all  things),  make  our  desires 
known  to  the  gods. 

8.  May  that  (digestive)  faculty  (of  Agni)  which 
regards  food  be  imparted  to  the  devout  and  illus- 
trious protector  of  priests,  as  the  source  of  virile 
vigour  ;'=  and  may  Agni  be  born,  as  (his)  robust, 
irreproachable,  youthful,  and  intelligent  son,  and 
instigate  him  (to  acts  of  worship). 

9.  The  Sun,  who  traverses,  alone,  the  path  of 
heaven,  with  the  speed  of  thought,  is,  at  once,  lord 
of  all  treasures  :  the  two  kings,  Mite  a  and  Varuna, 
with  bounteous  hands,  are  the  guardians  of  the 
precious  ambrosia  of  our  cattle. 

10.  Dissolve  not,  Agni,  our  ancestral  friendship ; 
for  thou  art  cognizant  of  the  past,  as  well  as  of  the 
present.     In  like  manner  as  light  (speeds  over)  the 


*  See  note  c,  p.  88. 

^  That  is,  we  have  not  any  to  spare  for  others. 

•=  That  is,  the  vigour  derived  from  the  digestive  affni.  Or 
retas  may  be  rendered  '  water ;'  when  the  passage  will  mean, 
"  may  fire  and  water,  or  heat  and  moisture,  be  spread  through 
the  earth,  for  the  generation  of  corn." 


190  RIG-YEDA    SANHITA. 

sky,  SO  decay  impairs  (my  body).   Think  of  me,  before 
that  source  of  destruction  (prevails)/'' 


SlJKTA  VIII.  (LXXII.) 
Rishi,  &c.,  as  before. 

Varga  XVII.  1-  Agni,  holding,  in  his  hands,  many  good  things 
for  men,  appropriates  the  prayers  addressed  to  the 
eternal  creator.^  Agni  is  the  lord  of  riches,  quickly 
bestowing  (on  those  who  praise  him)  all  golden 
(gifts). 

2.  All  the  immortals,  and  the  unbewildered 
(Maeuts),  wishing  for  him  who  was  (dear)  to  us  as  a 
son,  and  was  everywhere  around,  discovered  him 
not.  Oppressed  with  fatigue,  wandering  on  foot,  and 
cognizant  of  his  acts,  they  stopped  at  the  last 
beautiful  (hiding)-place  of  Agni. 

3.  Inasmuch,  Agni,  as  the  pure  (Maruts)  wor- 
shipped thee,  (equally)  pure,  with  clarified  butter, 
for  three  years,  therefore  they  acquired  names 
worthy  (to  be  repeated)  at  sacrifices,  and,  being 
regenerated,  obtained  celestial  bodies.*" 

^  Which  is  tantamount  to  asking  Agni  to  grant  immortaKty, — 
amritatwam  prayachchheti  ydvat. 

^  I.e,  Sivdtmdbhimuhham  haroti, — he  makes  them  present,  or  ap- 
plicable, to  himself.  The  creator  is  named  Vedhas, — usually  a  name 
of  Brahma, — and  is,  here,  associated  with  sakvata,  the  eternal. 
This  looks  as  if  a  first  cause  were  recognized,  distinct  from  Agtii 
and  the  elemental  deities,  although,  in  a  figurative  sense,  they  arc 
identified  with  it. 

''  The  next  has  only  suchayah,  the  pure  :  the  Scholiast  sup- 


FIRST   ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  191 

4.  Those  who  are  to  be  worshipped,  (the  gods), 
inquiring,  between  the  expansive  heaven  and  earth, 
(for  Agni),  recited  (hymns)  dedicated  to  Kudea." 
The  troop  of  mortaP  (Maruts),  with  (Indra),  the 
sharer  of  half  the  oblation, °  knowing  where  Ag^^i 
was  hiding,  found  him  in  his  excellent  retreat. 

5.  The  gods,  discovering  thee,  sat  down,  and, 
with  their  wives,  paid  reverential  adoration  to  thee, 

plies  Maruts,  for  whom,  it  is  said,  seven  platters  are  placed  at  the 
AgnicTiayana  ceremony :  and  they  are  severally  invoked  by  the 
appellations  rdris,  Anyddris,  Tddris,  Pratidris,  Mitali,  Saminitah, 
and  others.  In  conseqiience  of  this  participation,  with  Agni,  of 
sacrificial  oiferings,  they  exchanged  their  perishable,  for  immortal, 
bodies,  and  obtained  heaven.  The  Maruts  are,  therefore,  like  the 
Rihhus, — deified  mortals. 

*  The  allusion  to  ^^«^''s  hiding  himself,  occurring  previously, — 
also  in  verse  two, — has  already  been  explained  in  p.  3,  note  d.  But 
we  have,  here,  some  further  curious  identifications,  from  which  it 
appears  that  Rudra  is  Agni.  The  hymns  of  the  gods  are  addressed 
to  Agni,  and  are,  therefore,  termed  Rudriyd ;  for  Rudra  is  Agni, 
Rudrd'gnih..  The  legend  which  is  cited,  in  explanation,  from  the 
Taittir'iya  branch  of  the  Yajush,  relates,  that,  during  a  battle 
between  the  gods  and  Asuras,  Agni  carried  off  the  wealth  which 
the  former  had  concealed.  Detecting  the  theft,  the  gods  pursued 
the  thief,  and  forcibly  recovered  their  treasure.  Agni  wept 
{arod'it)  at  the  loss,  and  was,  thence,  called  Rudra. 

^  The  text  has  Q-alj  martah,  'the  mortal:'  the  Scholiast  sup- 
plies Marudganah. 

*=  Here,  also,  wo  have  only  the  epithet  nemadhiid,  'the  half- 
sharer,'  from  nema,  a  half;  to  which,  according  to  the  Taittir'iya 
school,  Indra  is  entitled,  at  all  sacrifices :  the  other  half  goes 
to  all  the  gods : — Sa/rve  devd  eho'rdhah.  Indra  eka  evdpard'rdhah. 


192  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA, 

upon  their  knees.''  Secure,  on  beholding  their 
friend,  of  being  protected,  thy  friends,  the  gods, 
abandoned  the  rest  of  their  bodies  in  sacrifice.'' 
Varga  XVIII.  6.  (Dovout  men),  competent  to  offer  sacrifices, 
have  known  the  thrice  seven  mystic  rites  comprised 
in  thee,''  and,  with  them,  worshipped  thee.  Do  thou, 
therefore,  with  like  affection,  protect  their  cattle, 
and  all  that  (belongs  to  them),  moveable  or  sta- 
tionary. 

7.  Agni,  who  art  cognizant  of  all  things  to  be 
known,  ever  provide,  for  the  subsistence  of  men, 
grief-alleviating  (food).  So  shalt  thou  be  the  diligent 
bearer  of  oblations,  and  messenger  of  the  gods, 
knowing  the  paths  between  (earth  and  heaven),  by 
which  they  travel. 

8.  The  seven  pure  rivers  that  flow  from  heaven 
(are  directed,  Agni,  by  thee :  by  thee  the  priests). 


^  Abliijnu  ;  or  it  may  be  applied  to  Agni  kneeling  before  them. 

^  So  the  text  Devd  vai  yajnam  atamcata, — The  gods,  verily, 
constituted  the  sacrifice.  But  the  expression  is,  still,  obscure, 
and  refers  to  some  legend,  probably,  which  has  not  been  preserved. 

*=  Guhjdni  *  *  padu, — secret  or  mysterious  steps,  by  which 
heaven  is  to  be  obtained  ;  meaning  the  ceremonies  of  the  Vedas. 
These  are  arranged  in  three  classes,  each  consisting  of  seven,  or : 
the  Pahmjajnas,  those  in  -which  food  of  some  kind  is  offered,  as 
in  the  Aupdsana,  Homa,  Vaisivadeva,  8fc. ;  the  Haviryajnas,  those 
in  which  clarified  butter  is  presented,  as  at  the  Agnyddheya, 
Baria,  Purnamdsa,  and  others ;  and  the  Somayajnas,  the  prin- 
cipal part  of  which  is  the  libation  of  the  Soma  juice,  as  the 
AgnisMoma,  Atyagnisht'oma,  Sfc.  All  these  are  comprised  in 
Agni,  because  they  cannot  be  celebrated  without  fire. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  193 

skilled  in  sacrifices,  knew  the  doors  of  the  (cave 
where)  the  treasure  (their  cattle,)  was  concealed : 
for  thee  Sarama  discovered  the  abundant  milk  of 
the  kine,  with  which  man,  the  progeny  of  Manus, 
still  is  nourished.'' 

9.  Thou  hast  been  fed,  (Agni,  with  oblations), 
ever  since  the  Adityas,  devising  a  road  to  immor- 
tality, instituted  all  (the  sacred  rites)  that  secured 
them  from  falling,^  and  mother  earth,  Aditi,  strove, 

*  These  circumstances  are  stated,  ia  the  text,  absolutely,  with- 
out any  reference  to  the  instrument,  or  agent.  The  Scholiast 
supplies  "Agni,  by  thee,  &c.  ;''  but  the  completion  of  the  ellipse 
is  consistent  with  prevailing  notions.  The  sun,  nourished  by  burnt- 
offerings,  is  enabled  to  send  down  the  rain  which  supplies  the 
rivers ;  the  Angirasas  recovered  their  cattle,  when  carried  off  by 
Bala,  through  the  knowledge  obtained  by  holy  sacrifices;  and 
Indra  sent  Sarama  on  the  search,  when  propitiated  by  oblations 
with  fire.  Hence,  Agni  may  be  considered  as  the  prime  mover 
in  the  incidents. 

^  It  may  be  doubted  if  either  of  the  former  translators  has  given 
a  correct  version  of  this  passage.  Rosen  has  Qui  cunctas  luce  des- 
titutas per  nodes  stant :  M.  Langlois  has  Qui  s'elevent,  *  *  assurant 
la  marche  de  {Vastre)  voyageur.  The  text  has  ye  viswa  swajJdfydni, 
interpreted,  by  Say  am,  sobhanmiy  apatanaheiubhuf  dm— those  which 
were  the  prosperous  causes  of  not  falling;  that  is  to  say,  certain 
sacred  acts,  which  secured,  to  the  Adityas,  their  station  in  heaven  ; 
or,  that  immortality  the  way  to  which  they  had  made  or  devised. 
This  interpretation  is  based  upon  a  Taittir'iya  text :  "  The  Adityas, 
desirous  of  heaven  (s?<2;fl!r^«,  ox  sivarga),  said,  'Let  us  go  down 
to  the  earth  :'  they  beheld,  there,  that  (jshat'trinsadrdtra)  rite  of 
thirty-six  nights  :  they  secured  it,  and  sacrificed  with  it."  It  is 
to  this,  and  a  similar  rite  of  fourteen  nights,  connected  with  the 

17 


194  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

with  her  magnitude,  to  uphold  (the  world),  along 
with  her  mighty  sons. 

10.  (The  offerers  of  oblations)  have  placed,  in 
this  (Agni),  the  graceful  honours  (of  the  ceremony), 
and  the  two  portions  of  clarified  butter  that  are 
the  two  eyes^  (of  the  sacrifice).  Then  the  immortals 
come  from  heaven ;  and  thy  bright  flames,  Agni, 
spread  in  all  directions,  like  rushing  rivers ;  and  the 
gods  perceive  it,  (and  rejoice). 

SUKTA    IX.    (LXXIII.) 

The  Rishi,  deity,  and  metre,  are  the  same. 

Varga  XIX,  1-  Agni,  like  patrimonial  wealth,  is  the  giver  of 
food :  he  is  a  director,  like  the  instructions  of  one 
learned  in  scripture :  he  rests  in  the  sacrificial 
chamber,  like  a  welcome  guest  ;  and,  like  an  oJGS.cia- 
ting  priest,  he  brings  prosperity  on  the  house  of  the 
worshipper. 

ay  anas,  or  '  comings,'  of  the  Adityas,  that  allusion  is  made. 
Some  reference  to  solar  revolutions  may  be  intended  ;  although  it 
is  not  obvious  what  can  be  meant,  as  no  such  movement  is 
effected  by  thirty-six  nights  or  days ;  and  the  Scholiast  terms 
them  karmdiii,  '  acts  or  ceremonies.'  A'  tasthuh  is  also  explained, 
they  made  or  instituted.  A  *  *  swapatydni  tasthuh  means,  accord- 
ing to  him,  chaturdaiardtrashaitrinsadrdtrdditydndm  ayandd'ini 
Tcarmdni  *  *  hritavantah, — they  made  the  rites,  or  acts,  which  were 
the  ayanas  and  others,  of  the  Adityas,  (and  which  were  for) 
thirty-six  or  fourteen  nights. 

"■  An  expression  found,  also,  in  another  text :  or  there  are,  as  it 
were,  two  eyes  of  a  sacrifice,  which  are  the  two  portions  of  the 
clarified  butter. 


FIRST   ASHTTAKA FITTH  ADHYATA.  195 

2.  He,  who  is  like  the  divine  Sun,  who  knows  the 
truth  (of  things),  preserves,  by  his  actions,  (his  vo- 
taries), in  all  encounters.  Like  nature,''  he  is  un- 
changeable, and,  like  soul,"  is  the  source  of  happi- 
ness.    He  is  ever  to  be  cherished. 

3.  He,  who,  like  the  divine  (Sun),  is  the  supporter 
of  the  universe,  abides  on  earth,  like  a  prince,  (sur- 
rounded by)  faithful  friends.  In  his  presence  men 
sit  down,  like  sons  in  the  dwelling  of  a  parent ;  and 
(in  purity,  he  resembles)  an  irreproachable  and 
beloved  wife. 

4.  Such  as  thou  art,  Agni,  men  preserve  thee, 
constantly  kindled,  in  their  dwellings,  in  secure 
places,  and  offer,  upon  thee,  abundant  (sacrificial) 
food.  Do  thou,  in  whom  is  all  existence,  be  the 
bearer  of  riches,  (for  our  advantage). 

5.  May  thy  opulent  worshippers,  Agni,  obtain 
(abundant)  food :  may  the  learned,  (who  praise  thee) 
and  offer  thee  (oblations),  acquire  long  life :  may'we 
gain,  in  battles,  booty  from  our  foes, — presenting  their 
portion  to  the  gods,  for  (the  acquisition  of)  renown. 

6.  The  cows,  loving  (Agni,  who  has  come  to  the    Varga  xx. 
hall  of  sacrifice),  sharing  his  splendour,  have  brought, 


*  Amafi,  the  term  of  the  text,  is  explained  rupa  or  swarupa, 
peculiar  form  or  nature.  As  this  is,  essentially,  the  same  in  all  the 
modifications  of  earth,  or  any  other  element,  so  Atjni  is  one  and 
the  same  in  all  the  sacrifices  performed  with  fire. 

^  As  soul  is  the  seat  and  source  of  all  happiness,  so  Agnt,  as 
the  chief  agent  of  sacrifice,  is  the  main  cause  of  felicity,  both  hero 
and  hereafter. 


196  RIG-YEDA   SANHITA. 

with  full  udders,  (their  milk,)  to  be  drunk.  The 
rivers,  soliciting  his  good  will,  have  flowed  from  a 
distance,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  mountain. 

7.  (The  gods),  who  are  entitled  to  worship,  so- 
liciting thy  good  will,  have  entrusted  to  thee,  re- 
splendent Agni,  the  (sacrificial)  food ;  and,  (for  the 
due  observance  of  sacred  rites),  they  have  made  the 
night  and  morning  of  different  colours, — or  black 
and  purple. 

8.  May  we,  mortals,  whom  thou  hast  directed  (to 
the  performance  of  sacrifices),  for  the  sake  of  riches, 
become  opulent.  Filling  heaven  and  earth,  and  the 
firmament,  (with  thy  radiance),  thou  protectest  the 
whole  world,  like  a  (sheltering)  shade.* 

9.  Defended,  Agni,  by  thee,  may  we  destroy  the 
horses  (of  our  enemies),  by  (our)  horses ;  their  men, 
by  (our)  men  ;  their  sons,  by  (our)  sons :  and  may 
our  sons,  learned,  and  inheritors  of  ancestral  wealth, 
live  for  a  hundred  winters. 

10.  May  these  our  praises,  sapient  Agni,  be 
grateful  to  thee,  both  in  mind  and  heart.  May  we 
be  competent  to  detain  thy  well-supporting  wealth, — 
offering,  upon  thee,  their  share  of  the  (sacrificial) 
food  to  the  gods. 

*  As  anything  affording  shade  keeps  off  the  heat  of  the  sun,  so 
Agni  guards  the  world  against  affliction. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  197 

ANUvIkA  XIII. 

SiJkta  I.  (LXXIV.) 

The  deity  is  Agni  ;  the  Rishi,  Gotajia,  son  of  Eahi5gana  ;  the 
metre,  Gdyatr'i. 

1.  Hastening   to   the   sacrifice,  let   us  repeat    a  Vargaxxi. 
prayer  to  Agni,  who  hears  us  from  afar ; 

2.  Who,  existing  of  old,  has  preserved  wealth,  for 
the  sacrificer,  when  malevolent  men  are  assembled 
together. 

3.  Let  men  praise  Agni,  as  soon  as  generated,  the 
slayer  of  Yritra,"  and  the  winner  of  booty  in  many 
a  battle. 

4.  (The  sacrificer),  in  whose  house  thou  art  the 
messenger  of  the  gods,  whose  offering  thou  convey- 
est  for  their  food,  and  whose  sacrifice  thou  ren- 
derest  acceptable, 

5.  Him,  Angieas,  son  of  strength,  men  call  for- 
tunate in  his  sacrifice,  his  deity,  his  oblations. 

6.  Bring  hither,  radiant  Agni,  the  gods,  to  (re-   VargaXXiL. 
ceive)  our  praise,  and  our  oblations  for  their  food. 

7.  Whenever  thou  goest,  Agni,  on  a  mission  of 
the  gods,  the  neighing  of  the  horses  of  thy  (swift-) 
moving  chariot,  however  audible,  is  not  heard. 

8.  He  who  was  formerly  subject  to  a  superior, 
having  been  protected,  Agni,  by  thee,  now  stands 
in  thy  presence,  as  an  offerer  (of  oblations),  without 
bashfulness,  and  supplied  with  food. 


*   Vritra  may  be  here  understood,  an  enemy  in  general ;  or, 
Agni  may  be  identified  with  Ind/ra. 


198  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

9.  Yerily,  divine  Agni,  thou  art  desirous  of 
bestowing,  upon  the  offerer  of  oblations)  to  the 
gods,  ample  (wealth),  brilliant  and  giving  vigour. 


SUKTA    II.    (LXXV.) 

Rishi,  deity,  and  metre,  as  before. 

Varga  XXIII.  1.  Attend  to  our  most  earnest  address,  pro- 
pitiatory of  the  gods,  accepting  our  oblations  in 
thy  mouth. 

2.  And  then,  most  wise  Agxi,  chief  of  the  An- 
GiRASAS,  may  we  address  (to  thee)  an  acceptable 
and  gratifying  prayer. 

3.  "Who,  AgjST,  amongst  men,  is  thy  kinsman? 
Who  is  worthy  to  offer  thee  sacrifice?  Who,  in- 
deed, art  thou  ?     And  where  dost  thou  abide  ? 

4.  Worship,  for  us,  Mitra  and  Varuna  ;  wor- 
ship, for  us,  all  the  gods ;  (celebrate)  a  great  sacri- 
fice ;  be  present  in  thine  own  dw^elling. 

Si5kta  III.  (LXXVI.) 

Rishi  and  deity  as  before  :  tbe  metre  is  TrisMuhh. 

Varga  XXIV.  1.  WTiat  approximation  of  the  mind,  Agni,  to 
thee  can  be  accomplished  for  our  good  ?  What  can 
a  hundred  encomiums  (effect)  ?  Who,  by  sacrifices, 
has  obtained  thy  might  ?  With  what  intent  may 
we  offer  thee  (oblations)  ?"" 


*  That  is,  it  is  not  possible  to  offer  sacrifice,  praise,  or  prayer, 
that  shall  be  worthy  of  Agni. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA. — FIFTH   ADHYAYA.  199 

2.  Come,  Agni,  hither:  invoker  (of  the  gods), 
sit  down :  ^  be  our  preceder ;  for  thou  art  irresistible. 
May  the  all-expansive  heaven  and  earth  defend 
thee,  that  thou  mayest  worship  the  gods  to  their 
great  satisfaction. 

3.  Utterly  consume  all  the  Rdkshasas^  Agni  ;  and 
be  the  protector  of  our  sacrifices  against  interrup- 
tion. Bring  hither  the  guardian  of  the  Soma  juice, 
(Indra),"  with  his  steeds,  that  we  may  show  hos- 
pitality to  the  giver  of  good. 

4.  I  invoke  (thee),  who  art  the  conveyer  (of 
oblations),  with  thy  flames,  with  a  hymn  productive 
of  progeny  (to  the  worshipper).  Sit  down  here,  with 
the  gods ;  and  do  thou,  who  art  deserving  of  wor- 
ship, discharge  the  office  of  Hotr'i,  or  of  Potri,  and 
awaken  us,  thou  who  art  the  depositary  and  gene- 
rator of  riches. 

5.  As,  at  the  sacrifice  of  the  holy  Manus,  thou, 
a  sage  amongst  sages,  didst  worship  the  gods  with 
oblations,  so,  also,  Agni,  veracious  invoker  of  the 
gods,  do  thou  to-day  (present  the  oblations)  with  an 
exhilarating  ladle. 

SiJkta  IV.  (LXXVII.) 
Rishi,  &c.  as  before. 
1.  What  (oblations)   may    we   off'er    to   Agni  ?  Varga  xxv. 

*  In  the  chamber  where  burnt-offerings  are  presented. 

^  Somapati,  which  is  a  rather  unusual  appellative  of  Indra. 
The  latter  name  is  not  in  the  text ;  but  the  deity  is  indicated  by 
harihhydm,  his  two  steeds. 


200  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

What  praise  is  addressed  to  the  luminous  (Agni), 
that  is  agreeable  to  the  gods, — that  Agni  who  is 
immortal,  and  observant  of  truth,  who  is  the 
invoker  of  the  gods,  the  performer  of  sacrifices,  and 
who,  (present)  amongst  men,  conveys  oblations  to 
the  deities? 

2.  Bring  hither,  with  praises,  him  who  is  most 
constant  in  sacrifices,  observant  of  truth,  and  the 
invoker  (of  the  gods)  ;  for  Agni,  when  he  repairs  to 
the  gods,  on  the  part  of  man,  knows  those  (who 
are  to  be  worshipped),  and  worships  them  with 
reverence.^ 

3.  For  he  is  the  performer  of  rites ;  he  is  the 
destroyer  and  reviver  (of  all  things)  ;^  and,  like  a 
friend,  he  is  the  donor  of  unattained  wealth.  All 
men  reverencing  the  gods,  and  approaching  the 
well-looking  Agni,  repeat  his  name  first,  in  holy 
rites. 

4.  May  Agni,  who  is  the  chief  director  of  sacri- 
fices, and  the  destroyer  of  enemies,  accept  our 
praise  and  worship,  with  oblations;  and  may  those 
who  are  affluent  with  great  wealth,  who  are  en- 
dowed with  strength,  and  by  whom  the  sacrificial 
food  has  been  prepared,  be  desirous  to  offer  adora- 
tion. 


^  The  expression  of  the  text  is  manasd,  'with  the  mind;'  but 
the  Scholiast  reads  namasd,  '  with  reverence,'  asserting  that  the 
letters  n  and  m  are  transposed. 

^  The  words  are  marya  and  sddhu  :  the  Commentator  explains 
the  first,  the  killer  or  extirpator  of  all ;  and  the  latter,  the  pro- 
ducer. 


FIEST   ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  201 

5.  Thus  has  Agni,  the  celebrator  of  sacrifices, 
and  by  whom  all  things  are  known,  been  hymned 
by  the  pious  descendants  of  Gotama.  To  them  has 
he  given  the  bright  Soma  juice  to  drink,  along  with 
the  sacrificial  food ;  and,  gratified  by  our  devotion, 
he  obtains  nutriment  (for  himself). 

Si5kta  V.  (LXXYIII.) 

The  Rishia-ndi  deity  are  the  same  :  the  metre  is  Gdyatr'i. 

1.  Knower    and    beholder   of    all    that   exists,  Vargaxxvi. 
Gotama^   celebrates  thee,  Agni,  with   praise :    we 

praise  thee,  repeatedly,  with  commendatory  (hymns)." 

2.  To  thee,  that  (Agni)  whom  Gotama,  desirous 
of  riches,  worships  with  praise,  we  offer  adoration, 
with  commendatory  (hymns). 

3.  "We  invoke  thee,  such  as  thou  art,  the  giver 
of  abundant  food,  in  like  manner  as  did  Angieas  : 
we  praise  thee,  repeatedly,  with  commendatory 
(hymns). 

4.  "We  praise  thee,  repeatedly,  with  commenda- 
tory (hymns),  who  art  the  destroyer  of  Veitka,  and 
who  puttest  the  Dasijus  to  flight. 

5.  The  descendants  of  Eahugana  have  recited 
sweet  speeches  to  Agni  :  we  praise  him,  repeatedly, 
with  commendatory  (hymns). 

"■  The  word  is  Gotamdh,  in  the  plural ;  whence  Eosen  renders  it 
Gotamidce.  The  Scholiast  limits  it  to  the  sense  of  the  singular, 
asserting  that  the  plural  is  used  honorificall)-  only. 

''  Mantras  is  supplied  by  the  commentator  :  the  text  has  only 
dyumnaih,  '  with  bright,'  or  those  manifesting  Agni's  worth. 


202  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 


Si5kta  VI.  (LXXIX.) 

The  Rishi  is  the  same,  Gotama  :  the  hymn  consists  of  four 
TricJias,  or  triads:  the  deity  of  the  first  is  the  Aoifi  of  the 
middle  region,  the  ethereal  or  electric  fire,  or  lightning ;  the 
deity  of  the  other  triads  is  Aght,  in  his  general  character :  the 
metre  of  the  first  of  them  is  TrisMuhh  ;  of  the  second,  TJ&hnih  ; 
and,  of  the  last  two,  Gdyatr'i. 

Targa  XXVII.  1.  The  golden-haired  Agni  is  the  agitator  of  the 
clouds,  when  the  rain  is  poured  forth,  and,  moving 
with  the  swiftness  of  the  wind,  shines  with  a  bright 
radiance.  The  mornings  know  not  (of  the  showers),* 
like  honest^  (people),  who,  provided  with  food,  are 
intent  upon  their  own  labours. 

2.  Thy  falling  (rays),  accompanied  by  the  moving 
(Maruts),  strike  against  (the  cloud)  :  the  black 
shedder  of  rain  has  roared :  when  this  is  done,  (the 
shower)  comes,  with  delightful  and  smiling  (drops), 
the  rain  descends,  the  clouds  thunder. 

3,  When  this  (the  lightning,  Agni,)  nourishes 
the  world  with  the  milk  of  the  rain,  and  conducts 
it,  by  the  most  direct  ways,*=  to  (the  enjoyment  of) 


■■  Agni,  in  his  manifestation  of  lightning,  takes  part  in  the 
production  of  rain,  by  piercing  the  clouds.  The  dawn  is  not 
concerned  in  the  operation ;  but  this  is  said,  not  to  depreciate  the 
excellence  of  Ushas,  but  to  enhance  that  of  Apii. 

^  Sati/dh,  true,  sincere :  there  is  no  substantive ;  but  jprajdh, 
people,  or  progeny,  is  supplied  by  the  commentary.  Rosen  sub- 
stitutes mulieres,  satijdh  being  feminine  :  but  so  also  is  praj'dh. 

"  Or  uses, — as  drinking,  washing,  bathing,  and  the  like. 


FIRST   ASHfAKA — FIFTH  ADHYATA.  203 

water,  then  Mitea,  Artaman,  Varuna,  and  the 
circumambient  (troop  of  Maeuts),  pierce  through 
the  (investing)  membrane,  into  the  womb  of  the 
cloud. 

4.  Agni,  son  of  strength,  lord  of  food  and  of 
cattle,  give  us  abundant  sustenance,  thou  who 
knowest  all  that  exists. 

5.  He,  the  blazing  Agni,  who  is  wise,  and  the 
granter  of  dwellings,  is  to  be  praised  by  our  hymns. 
0  thou  whose  mouth  (glows)  with  many  (flames),* 
shine  (propitiously,  so)  that  food-providing  wealth 
may  be  ours  ! 

6.  Shining  Agni,  drive  off  (all  disturbers  of  the 
rite),  either  by  thyself,  or  (thy  servants),  whether  by 
day  or  by  night:  sharp-visaged  Agni,  destroy  the 
Rakshasas  entirely. 

7.  Agni,  who,  in  all  rites,  art  to  be  praised,  guard      varga 
us  with  thy  protection,  (propitiated)  by  the  recita-    ^^^"^m- 
tion  of  the  metrical  hymn.'' 

8.  Grant  us,  Agni,  riches  that  dispel  poverty, 
that  are  desirable  (to  all),  and  cannot  be  taken 
(from  us),  in  all  encounters  (with  our  foes). 

9.  Grant  us,  Agni,   for   our  livelihood,   wealth, 


*  Purvaniha;  from  puru,  many,  and  amha,  face  or  mouth: 
flames  are  understood,  agreeably  to  a  common  name  of  Agni, 
Jivdldjihwa,  flame-tongued,  Eosen  has,  evidently,  read  the  muhha 
of  the  commentary,  suhha,  and  Qx^loins  purvanika,  multis  gaudiis 
fruens. 

"  Gdyatra;  either  a  portion  of  the  Sdma,  so  termed,  or  the 
Gdyatri  metre,  according  to  the  Scholiast. 


204  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

with    sound   understanding,    conferring   happiness, 
and  sustaining  (us)  through  life. 

10.  GoTAMA,  desirous  of  wealth,  offers,  to  the 
sharp-flaming  Agnt,  pure  prayers  and  praises. 

11.  May  he,  Agni,  who  annoys  us,  whether  nigh 
or  afar,  perish ;  and  do  thou  be,  to  us,  (propitious) 
for  our  advancement. 

12.  The  thousand -eyed,^  all-beholding  Agni 
drives  away  the  Rakshasas)  and,  (praised,  by  us,) 
with  holy  hymns,  he  (the  invoker  of  the  gods,) 
celebrates  their  praise. 


SuKTA  YII.  (LXXX.) 

The   Rishi  is  Gotaita,  as  before;  but  the  deity  is  Indea  :  the 
metre  is  Panhti. 

Vargaxxix.  1.  Mighty  wiclder  of  the  thunderbolt,  when  the 
priest^  had  thus  exalted  thee  (by  praise),  and  the 
exhilarating  Soma  juice  (had  been  drunk),  thou 
didst  expel,  by  thy  vigour,  Ahi  from  the  earth, 
manifesting  thine  own  sovereignty.*' 

2.    That   exceedingly   exhilarating   Soma    juice, 

"  The  literal  rendering  of  the  epithet  of  the  text,  Sahasrdlcsha, 
which  identifies  Agni  with  Indra;  but  Sdtjana  interprets  it,  having 
countless  flames, — asanlchydtajwdla. 

^  The  Brahma,  which  the  Scholiast  interprets  Brdkmana. 

•^  The  burden  of  this  and  of  all  the  other  stanzas  of  this  hymn 
is  archann  anu  swardjyam.  The  first  term  usually  implies  wor- 
shipping, honouring;  but  the  Commentator  gives,  as  its  equivalent, 
prakaiayan :  swasya  swdmitwamprakat'ayan, — making  manifest  his 
own  mastership  or  supremacy. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA FIFTH  ADHYAYA.  205 

which  was  brought  by  the  hawk,^  (from  heaven), 
when  poured  forth,  has  exhilarated  thee,  so  that,  in 
thy  vigour,  thunderer,  thou  hast  struck  Yritra 
from  the  sky,  manifesting  thine  own  sovereignty. 

3.  Hasten,  assail,  subdue.  Thy  thunderbolt  can- 
not fail:  thy  vigour,  Indra,  destroys  men.  Slay 
Yritra,  win  the  waters,  manifesting  thine  own 
sovereignty. 

4.  Thou  hast  struck  Yritra  from  off  the  earth, 
and  from  heaven.  (Now)  let  loose  the  wind-bound, 
life-sustaining  rain,  manifesting  thine  own  sove- 
reignty. 

5.  Indignant  Indra,  encountering  him,  has  struck, 
with  his  bolt,  the  jaw  of  the  trembling  Yritra, 
setting  the  waters  free  to  flow,  and  manifesting  his 
own  sovereignty. 

6.  Indra  has  struck  him,  on  the  temple,  with  his  Varga  xxx. 
hundred-edged  thunderbolt,   and,  exulting,  wishes 

to  provide  means  of  sustenance  for  his  friends, 
manifesting  his  own  sovereignty. 

7.  Cloud-borne  Indra,  wielder  of  the  thunder- 
bolt, verily,  thy  prowess  is  undisputed  ;  since  thou, 
with  (superior)  craft,  hast  slain  that  deceptive  deer," 
manifesting  thine  own  sovereignty. 

8.  Thy  thunderbolts  were  scattered  widely  over 


*  S'yendhhrita,  as  Eosen  translates  it,  accipUre  delatus.  The 
Scholiast  says,  it  was  brought  from  heaven  by  the  Gdyatr'i,  having 
the  wings  of  a  hawk. 

*•  The  commentary  says  Vritra  had  assumed  the  form  of  a 
deer ;  but  nothing  further  relating  to  this  incident  occurs. 


206  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

ninety  and  nine  rivers  :^  great  is  thy  prowess. 
Strength  is  deposited  in  thy  arms,  manifesting  thine 
own  sovereignty. 

9.  A  thousand*  mortals  worshipped  him,  together ; 
twenty''  have  hummed  (his  praise) ;  a  hundred  (sages) 
repeatedly  glorify  him.  So,  Indea,  is  the  oblation 
lifted  up,  manifesting  thine  own  sovereignty. 

10.  Indra  overcame,  by  his  strength,  the  strength 
of  Yritea  :  great  is  his  manhood,  wherewith,  having 
slain  Yritra,  he  let  loose  the  waters,  manifesting 
his  own  sovereignty. 

VargaXXXi.  H-  This  hoavon  and  earth  trembled,  thunderer, 
at  thy  wrath,  when,  attended  by  the  Maruts,  thou 
slowest  Yritra  by  thy  prowess,  manifesting  thine 
own  sovereignty. 

12.  Yritra  deterred  not  Indra  by  his  trembling, 
or  his  clamour:  the  many-edged  iron  thunderbolt 
fell  upon  him,  (Indra)  manifesting  his  own  sove- 
reignty. 

13.  When  thou  (Indra,)  didst  encounter,  with 
thy  bolt,  Yritra  and  the  thunderbolt  (which  he 
hurled),  then,  Indra,  the  strength  of  thee,  deter- 
mined to  slay  Ahi,  was  displayed  in  the  heavens, 
manifesting  thine  own  sovereignty. 

14.  At  thy  shout,  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  all 


*  Put  for  any  indefinite  number. 

*  The  sixteen  priests  employed  at  a  sacrifice,  the  Yajamdna 
and  his  wife,  and  two  functionaries  entitled  the  Sadasya  and 
S'amitri,  directors,  probably,  of  the  ceremonies  of  the  assembly, 
not  of  the  worship. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  207 

things,  moveable  or  immoveable,  trembled :  even 
TwASHTEi  shook  with  fear,  Indra,  at  thy  wrath, 
manifesting  thine  own  sovereignty. 

15.  We  know  not,  of  a  certainty,  the  all-pervading 
Indra.  Who  (does  know  him,  abiding)  afar  off,^  in 
his  strength  ?  For  in  him  have  the  gods  concentrated 
riches,  and  worship,  and  power,  manifesting  his 
own  sovereignty. 

16.  In  like  manner  as  of  old,  so,  in  whatever  act 
of  worship  Atharvan,  or  father  Ma:nus,  or  Dadh- 
YACH^  engaged,  their  oblations  and  their  hymns 
were,  all,  congregated  in  that  Indra,  manifesting 
his  own  sovereignty. 


SIXTH  ADHYAYA. 


ANUVAKA  XIII.  (contmued). 

StJkta  VIII.  (LXXXI.) 

The  Rishi,  deity,  and  metre,  as  before. 

1.  Indra,  the  slayer  of  Vritra,  has  been  aug-    varga  i. 
mented,  in  strength  and  satisfaction,  by  (the  adora- 


*  The  expression  is  very  elliptical,  Jco  v'lryd  parah;  being, 
literally,  who — with  vigour — afar.  The  Scholiast  completes  the 
sentence  as  in  the  text. 

*•  Manushpitd  ;  Manus  being  the  progenitor  of  all  mankind. 
DadhyacJi,  or  DadMchi,  is  a  well-known  Rishi,  the  son  of  Atharvan, 
of  whom  mention,  subsequently,  more  than  once,  recurs. 


208  RIG- VEDA  SANHITA. 

tion  of)  men.^     We  invoke  him  in  great  conflicts,  as 
well  as  in  little.     May  he  defend  us  in  battles. 

2.  For  thou,  hero,  Indra,  art  a  host :  thou  art 
the  giver  of  much  booty :  thou  art  the  exalter  of 
the  humble  :  thou  bestowest  (riches)  on  the  wor- 
shipper who  offers  thee  oblations ;  for  abundant  is 
thy  wealth. 

3.  When  battles  arise,  wealth  devolves  on  the 
victor.  Yoke  thy  horses,  humblers  of  the  pride 
(of  the  foe),  that  thou  mayest  destroy  one,  and 
enrich  another.^    Place  us,  Indea,  in  affluence. 

4.  Mighty  through  sacrifice,  formidable  (to  foes), 
partaking  of  the  sacrificial  food,  Indra  has  aug- 
mented his  strength.  Pleasing  in  appearance, 
having  a  handsome  chin,  and  possessing  (bright) 
coursers,  he  grasps  the  iron  thunderbolt  in  his  con- 
tiguous hands,  for  (our)  prosperity. 

5.  He  has  filled  the  space  of  earth  and  the  fir- 

^  The  Scholiast  explains  this, — "a  deity,  acquiring  vigour  by 
praise,  increases  ;"  that  is,  becomes  more  powerful  and  mighty. 
The  notion  is  clear  enough;  but,  although  'increases'  is  the 
literal  rendering  ai  prai-anViate,  it  expresses  its  purport  but  in- 
completely. 

^  "We  have  a  legend,  in  illustration  of  this  passage :  Gotama, 
the  son  of  Rahugana,  was  the  purohita  of  the  Kuru  and  Srinjaya 
princes,  and,  in  an  engagement  with  other  kings,  propitiated 
Indra  by  this  hymn,  who,  in  consequence,  gave  the  victory  to  the 
former.  Eosen  puts  the  phrase  interrogatively :  Quemnam  occisurus 
es?  quemnam  opulentim  dalis?  But  the  Scholiast  explains  X-am, 
whom,  by  hancfdt,  any  one,  some  one :  that  is,  Indra  gives  the 
victory  to  whomsoever  he  is  pleased  with. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  209 

* 

mament,  (with  his  glory);  he  has  fixed  the  con- 
stellations in  the  sky.  No  one  has  been,  ever,  born, 
or  will  be  born,  Indra,  like  to  thee  :  thou  hast 
sustained  the  universe. 

6.  May  Indra,  the  protector,  who  returns  to  the    '^^^s^  ii- 
giver  (of  oblations)  the  food  that  is  fit  for  mortals, 
bestow  (such  food)  on  us.     Distribute  thy  wealth, 

which  is  abundant,  so  that  I  may  obtain  (a  portion) 
of  thy  riches. 

7.  The  upright  performer  of  (pious)  acts  is  the 
donor  of  herds  of  cattle  to  us,  when  receiving 
frequent  enjoyment  (from  our  libations).  Take  up, 
Indra,  with  both  hands,  many  hundred  (sorts) 
of  treasure :  sharpen  (our  intellects)  :  bring  us 
wealth. 

8.  Enjoy,  along  with  us,  0  hero,  the  suffused  liba- 
tion, for  (the  increase  of  our)  strength  and  wealth. 
"We  know  thee  (to  be)  the  possessor  of  vast  riches, 
and  address  to  thee  our  desires.  Be,  therefore,  our 
protector. 

9.  These,  thy  creatures,  Indra,  cherish  (the  ob- 
lation) that  may  be  partaken  of  by  all.  Thou,  lord 
of  all,  knowest  what  arc  the  riches  of  those  men 
who  make  no  offerings.     Bring  their  wealth  to  us. 


SUKTA  IX.  (LXXXII.) 

The  deity  and  Rishi  are  the  same ;  the  metre  is  Panlcti,  except 
in  the  last  stanza,  where  it  is  Jagat'i. 

1.    Approach,    Maghavan,    and    listen    to    our  Vargaiii. 
praises  :    be  not   different   (from  what  thou  hast 

18 


210  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

hitherto  heen).''  Since  thou  hast  inspired  us  with 
true  speech,  thou  art  solicited  with  it.  Therefore, 
quickly  yoke  thy  horses. 

2.  (Thy  worshippers)  have  eaten  the  food  which 
thou  hadst  given,  and  have  rejoiced,  and  have 
trembled  through  their  precious  (bodies)  :  self- 
illuminated  sages  have  glorified  thee  with  com- 
mendable thoughts.  Therefore,  Indea,  quickly  yoke 
thy  horses. 

3.  We  praise  thee,  Maghavan,  who  lookest  be- 
nignly (upon  all).  Thus  praised  by  us,  repair,  (in 
thy  car),  filled  with  treasure,  to  those  who  desire 
thy  presence.    Indea,  quickly  yoke  thy  horses. 

4.  May  he  ascend  that  chariot  which  rains 
(blessings),  and  grants  cattle,  and  which  provides 
the  vessel  filled  with  the  mixture  of  Soma  juice  and 
grain.  ^   Quickly,  Indea,  yoke  thy  horses. 

5.  Performer  of  many  (holy)  acts,  let  thy  steeds 
be  harnessed  on  the  right  and  on  the  left ;  and,  when 
exhilarated  by  the  (sacrificial)  food,  repair,  in  thy 


"  The  text  is  merely  mdtathd  iva, — (be)  not,  as  it  were,  non- 
sucli ;  that  is,  according  to  Sdyana,  be  not  the  contrary  of  that 
propitious  divinity  which  thou  hast  always  been  to  us.  The  rest 
of  the  stanza  is  equally  obscure  :  "  Since  thou  makest  us  possessed 
of  true  speech  {siinritdvatah),  therefore  thou  art  asked  {dd  artha- 
ydsa  it,  i.e.,  arthayasa  eva),''^  that  is,  to  accept  our  praises.  In  this 
hymn,  also,  we  have  a  burden  repeated  at  the  close  of  each  stanza. 

^  Pdtram  hdriyojanam,  a  plate  or  patera  filled  with  hariyo- 
jana ;  the  appellation  of  a  mixture  of  fried  barley,  or  other  grain, 
and  Soma  juice. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  211 

chariot,  to  thy  beloved  wife.  Quickly,  Indra,  yoke 
thy  horses. 

6.  I  harness  thy  long-maned  steeds  with  (sacred) 
prayers.  Depart;  take  the  reins  in  your  hands. 
The  effused  and  exciting  juices  have  exhilarated 
thee,  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt.  Thus  filled  with 
nutriment,  rejoice,  with  thy  spouse. 

St5kta  X.  (LXXXIII.) 

Rishi  and  deity  as  before  ;  the  metre  is  Jagat'i. 

1.  The  man  who  is  well-protected,  Indra,  by  thy    varga  iv. 
cares,  (and   dwells)  in  a  mansion  where  there  are 
horses,  is  the  first  who  goes  to  (that  where  there 

are)  cows.  Enrich  him  with  abundant  riches ;  as  the 
imconscious  rivers'"  flow,  in  all  directions,  to  the 
ocean. 

2.  In  like  manner  as  the  bright  waters  flow  to 
the  sacrificial  ladle,  so  they  (the  gods,)  look  down 
(upon  it) ;  as  the  difl'usive  light  (descends  to  earth). 
The  gods  convey  it,  desirous  of  being  presented  to 
them,  by  progressive  (movements,  to  the  altar),  and 
are  impatient  to  enjoy  it,  filled  with  the  oblation ;  as 
bridegrooms  (long  for  their  brides).^ 

*  Afo  *  vichetasah.  The  epithet  is  explained,  by  the  Scholiast, 
the  sources  of  excellent  knowledge,' — visisMajndnahetubhutdh ; 
and  Rosen  renders  it,  accordingly,  sapientiam  conferentes  :  but  it 
seems  preferable  to  understand  the  prefix  vi  in  its  sense  of  priva- 
tion ;  for  it  is  not  very  intelligible  how  the  waters  should  confer, 
or  even  possess,  intelligence. 

**  In  this  stanza,  as  usual  in  the  more  elaborate  metres,  we 


212  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

3.  Thou  hast  associatedj  Indra,  words  of  sacred 
praise  with  both  (the  grain  and  butter  of  oblation), 
placed  together  in  ladles,  and  jointly  presented  to 
thee ;  so  that  (the  sacrificer),  undisturbed,  remains 
(engaged)  in  thy  worship,  and  is  prosperous :  for,  to 
the  sacrificer,  pouring  out  oblations  (to  thee),  auspi- 
cious power  is  granted. 

4.  The  Angirasas  first  prepared  (for  Indra,)  the 
sacrificial  food,  and  then,  with  kindled  fire,  (wor- 
shipped him)  with  a  most  holy  rite  :  they,  the  in- 
stitutors  (of  the  ceremony),  acquired  all  the  wealth 
of  Pani,  comprising  horses,  and  cows,  and  (other) 
animals. 

6.  Atharvan  first,  by  sacrifices,  discovered  the 
path  (of  the  stolen  cattle) :  then  the  bright  sun,  the 
cherisher  of  pious  acts,  was  born.^     Atharvan  re- 


encounter  strained  collocations,  and  elliptical  and  obscure  allusions, 
imperfectly  transformed  into  something  intelligible,  by  the  addi- 
tions of  the  Scholiast.  Thus,  avah  pasyanti,  '  they  look  down,'  is 
rendered  special  by  adding  devdh,  'the  gods,'  who  look  down,  it 
is  said,  upon  the  sacrificial  ladle,  hotriyam,  well- pleased  to  behold 
it  filled  with  the  intended  libation.  The  text,  again,  has  only  "  as 
diff'used  light:"  the  comment  adds,  "descends  on  earth."  In  the 
next  phrase,  we  have,  "  the  gods  lead  that  which  is  pleased,  by 
the  libation,  and  wishes  for  them,  either  by  progressive  move- 
ments, or  in  an  eastern  direction  {prdchaih),  as  bridegrooms 
delight."  What  is  so  led  ?  And  whither  ?  The  ladle,  chamasa, 
the  altar,  vedi,  as  well  as  the  bride  or  maiden,  kanyaM,  are 
filled  up  by  the  comment.  The  same  character  of  brevity  and 
obscurity  pervades  the  entire  hymn. 

*  Ajani.      But  it  may  mean,  as  the  Scholiast  says,  "  the  sun 


FIRST   ASHTAKA SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  213 

gained  the  cattle ;  Kavya  (Usanas)  was  associated 
with  him.^  Let  us  worship  the  immortal  (Indra), 
who  was  born  to  restrain  (the  Asuras).^ 

6.  Whether  the  holy  grass  be  cut  (for  the  rite) 
that  brings  down  blessings  ;'  whether  the  priest 
repeat  the  (sacred)  verse,  in  the  brilliant  (sacrifice)  ; 
whether  the  stone  (that  expresses  the  Soma  juice) 
sound  like  the  priest  who  repeats  the  hymn  ;  on  all 
these  occasions,  Indra  rejoices. 

SuKTA  XI.  (LXXXIV.) 
The  deity  and  the  Rishi  are  the  same;  but  the  metre  is  diversified. 
The  first  six  stanzas  are  in  the  AnusMuhh  measure ;  the  three 
next,  in  UsMih  ;  the  three  next,  in  Pankti ;  the  three  next,  in 
Gdyatr'i ;  and  the  next  three,  in  the  TrisMubh :  the  nineteenth 
verse  is  in  the  Brihati ;  and  the  twentieth,  in  the  Satohrihati 
metre. 

1.  The  Soma  juice  has  been  expressed,  Indra,    Varga  v. 

appeared,  in  order  to  light  the  way  to  the  cave  where  the  cows 
were  hidden." 

*  "With  Indra,  according  to  the  comment,  which  also  identifies 
Kdvya  with  Usanas  ;  and  the  latter,  with  Bhrigu :  Kdvyah  Kaveh 
putra  Usand  Bhriguh ;  meaning,  however,  perhaps,  only  that  Usanas 
was  of  the  family  of  Bhrigu. — Vishnu  Purdna,  p.  82,  n.  1 .  [See  the 
new  edition,  Vol.  I.,  p.  152,  and,  particularly,  a  note  at  p.  200.] 

''  The  text  has  only  yamasya  jdtam  :  the  comment  explains  the 
former,  asurdiidm  myamandrtham. 

"^  Swapafydya.  Resolving  this  into  su  and  apatya,  Rosen  ren- 
ders it,  egregiam  prolem  conferentis  caussa ;  and  M.  Langlois  has 
jaloux  (Vohtenir  une  heureuse  posUrite,  (le  chef  de  famillej.  Sdyana 
understands  it  differently,  and  explains  it  by  sohhandpatanahetu- 
hhutdya, — for  the  sake  of  the  descent,  or  coming  down,  of  what 
is  good. 


214  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

for  thee :  potent  humbler  (of  thy  foes),  approach. 
May  vigour  fill  thee  (by  the  potation) ;  as  the  sun 
fills  the  firmament  with  his  rays. 

2.  May  his  horses  bear  Indra,  who  is  of  irresisti- 
ble prowess,  to  the  praises  and  sacrifices  of  sages 
and  of  men. 

3.  Slayer  of  Vritra,  ascend  thy  chariot ;  for  thy 
horses  have  been  yoked  by  prayer.  May  the  stone 
(that  bruises  the  Soma)  attract,  by  its  sound,  thy 
mind  towards  us. 

4.  Drink,  Indra,  this  excellent,  immortal,  exhila- 
rating libation,  the  drops  of  which  pellucid  (beverage) 
flow  towards  thee,  in  the  chamber  of  sacrifice. 

5.  Ofi'er  worship,  quickly,  to  Indra  ;  recite  hymns 
(in  his  praise) :  let  the  efi'used  drops  exhilarate  him : 
pay  adoration  to  his  superior  strength, 

VargaVi.  6.  When,  Indra,  thou  harnessest  thy  horses, 
there  is  no  one  a  better  charioteer  than  thou :  no 
one  is  equal  to  thee  in  strength :  no  one,  although 
well-horsed,  has  overtaken  thee. 

7.  He  who  alone  bestows  wealth  upon  the  man 
who  offers  him  oblations  is  the  undisputed  sovereign, 
Indra.     Ho  ! "" 

8.  When  will  he  trample,  with  his  foot,  upon  the 
man  who  offers  no  oblations,  as  if  upon  a  coiled-up 

°'  This  verse  and  the  two  following  end  with  the  unconnected 
term  anga,  which  the  Scholiast  interprets  '  quick :'  but  it  is,  more 
usually,  an  interjection  of  calling.  So  Ivosen  has  OJie!  M. 
Langlois,  Oh  vt'ens  ! 


FIRST  ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  215 

snake  ?''  When  will  Indra  listen  to  our  praises  ? 
Ho! 

9.  Indra  grants  formidable  strength  to  him  who 
worships  him,  having  libations  prepared.     Ho  ! 

10.  The  white  cows  drink  of  the  sweet  Soma 
juice,  thus  poured  forth,  and,  associated  with  the 
bountiful  IxDRA,  for  the  sake  of  beauty,  rejoice  : 
abiding  (in  their  stalls),  they  are  expectant  of  his 
sovereignty.'' 

11.  Desirous  of  his  contact,  those  brindled  cows    VargaVii. 
dilute  the  Soma  juice  with  their  milk :  the  milch 

kine  that  are  loved  of  Indra  direct  his  destructive 
thunderbolt  against  his  foes,  abiding  (in  their  stalls), 
expectant  of  his  sovereignty. 

12.  These  intelligent  kine  reverence  his  prowess 
with  the  adoration  (of  their  milk) ;  they  celebrate 
his  many  exploits, — as  an  example  to  later  (adver- 
saries),— abiding  (in  their  stalls),  expectant  of  his 
sovereignty.  /  , 

^  The  text  has  kshumpa,  explained  ahichchhatraka,  properly, 
a  thorny  plant,  but  apparently  intended,  by  the  Scholiast,  for  a 
snake  coiled  up,  or  one  sleeping  in  a  ring,  which  is,  therefore,  killed 
without  difficulty :  manclaldhdrena  saydnam  leas  chid  andydsena 
hantL     Rosen  prefers  the  usual  sense,  pede  fncticem  reltit,  conteret. 

^  This,  which  constitutes  the  burden  of  the  triad,  is  rather 
obscure.  The  text  is  vasw'ir  anu  swardjyam,  literally,  dwelling 
after,  or  according  to,  his  own  dominion.  Sdyatia  does  not  make 
it  more  intelligible.  "  Those  cows,"  he  says,  "  who,  by  giving 
milk,  are  the  means  of  providing  habitation  {nwdsahdrinyah),  re- 
main looking  to  the  kingdom  of  him,  or  Indra.''''  So  Rosen  has 
domicilium  procuranfes,  quce  ipsius  dominium  respicientcs  adstant. 


216  BIG-VEDA    SANHITi. 

13.  Indra,  with    the  bones  of  Dadhyach,  slew 
ninety  times  nine  Vritras." 

14.  Wishing  for  the  horse's  head  hidden  in  the 
mountains,  he  found  it  at  S'aryanavat. 

15.  The  (solar  rays)  found,  on  this  occasion,  the 


^  Dadhyach,  also  named  Badh'icha  and  DadMchi,  is  a  well- 
known  sage  in  Paurdnih  legend,  of  whom  it  is  said  that  his 
bones  formed  the  thunderbolt  of  Indra,  The  story  seems  to  have 
varied  from  the  original  Vaidik  fiction,  as  we  shall  have  subsequent 
occasion  to  notice  {Sukta  CXVI.).  In  this  place  the  story  told 
by  the  Scholiast  also  somewhat  difi'ers.  He  relates,  that,  while 
Dadhyach,  the  son  of  Atharvan,  lived,  the  Asuras  were  intimi- 
dated and  tranquillized  by  his  appearance;  but,  when  he  had 
gone  to  Swarga,  they  overspread  the  whole  earth.  Indra,  inquiring 
what  had  become  of  him,  and  whether  nothing  of  him  had  been 
left  behind,  was  told,  that  the  horse's  head  with  which  he  had,  at 
one  time,  taught  the  Iladhuvidyd  to  the  Aswins,  was  somewhere 
in  existence,  but  no  one  knew  where.  Search  was  made  for  it, 
and  it  was  found  in  the  lake  S'aryanavat,  on  the  skirts  of  Kuruk- 
shetra ;  and,  with  the  bones  of  the  skull,  Indra  slew  the  Asuras, 
or,  as  otherwise  explained,  foiled  the  nine  times  ninety  (or  eight 
hundred  and  ten)  stratagems  or  devices  of  the  Asuras  or  Vritras. 
The  Scholiast  accounts  for  the  number  by  saying,  that,  in  the 
beginning,  the  Asur'i  mdyd,  or  demoniac  illusion,  was  practised, 
in  the  three  worlds,  for  three  periods  in  each, — past,  present,  and 
future, — whence  it  was  ninefold :  each  being  exerted  with  three 
saldis,  or  energies,  made  the  number  twenty-seven  :  each  of  these, 
again,  being  modified  by  the  ihxQQ  gums,  they  become  eighty-one ; 
and  the  scene  of  their  display  extending  to  each  of  the  ten  regions 
of  space,  the  total  reaches  the  nine  times  ninety  of  the  text,  or 
eight  hundred  and  ten.  This  seems  to  be  pure  invention,  without 
any  rational  or  allegorical  meaning. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  217 

light  of  TwASHTRi,  verily,  concealed  in  the  mansion 
of  the  moving  moon.^ 

16.  Who  yokes,  to-day,  to  the  pole  of  the  car  (of  VargaViii. 
Indea)  his  vigorous  and  radiant  steeds,  whose 
fury  is  unbearable,  in  whose  mouths  are  arrows, 
who  trample  on  the  hearts  (of  enemies),  who  give 
happiness  (to  friends)  ?  (The  sacrificer)  who  praises 
their  (performance  of  their)  duties  obtains  (long) 
life." 


^  The  text  has  only  "they  found;"  the  Scholiast,  following 
Tdsha  (iWr.,  IV.,  25),  supplies  Adityasya  rasmayah,  the  rays  of  the 
sun.  TwasMri  is  here  used  for  the  sun,  being  one  of  the  Adityas  ; 
or,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  for  Indra^  to  whom  the  hymn  is 
addressed,  and  who  is,  also,  one  of  the  Adityas.  The  purport  of 
the  stanza  is,  apparently,  the  obscure  expression  of  an  astronomical 
fact, — known  to  the  authors  of  the  Vedas, — that  the  moon  shone 
only  through  reflecting  the  light  of  the  sun.  So  it  is  said,  "  the 
rays  of  the  sun  are  reflected  back  in  the  bright  watery  orb  of  the 
moon;"  and,  again,  "the  solar  radiance,  concealed  by  the  night, 
enters  into  the  moon,  and  thus  dispels  darkness  by  night,  as  well 
as  by  day."  According  to  the  Nirukta,  II.,  6,  it  is  one  ray  of  the 
sun  (that  named  Sushumiia,)  which  lights  up  the  moon  ;  and  it  is 
with  respect  to  that  that  its  light  is  derived  from  the  sun.  The 
Purdnas  have  adopted  the  doctrine  of  the  Vedas. —  Vishnu 
Purdria,  p.  236. 

"  Another  interpretation  may  be  assigned  to  this  verse,  which 
turns  upon  rendering  kah  by  Prajdpati,  instead  of  who,  and  gdh 
by  words  of  the  Veda,  instead  of  horses;  making  "Prajdpati 
combines,  to-day,  with  the  burden  of  the  sacrifice  the  sacred 
words  that  are  effective,  brilliant,  essential,  emitted  from  the 
mouth,  animating  the  heart,  and  productive  of  happiness :  the 
worshipper  who  fulfils  the  object  of  such  prayers  obtains  life." 


218  RIG-YEDA   SANHITA. 

17.  Who  goes  forth,  (through  dread  of  foes,  when 
IxDRA  is  at  hand)  ?  Who  is  harmed  (by  his  enemies)? 
Who  is  terrified  ?  Who  is  aware  that  Indea  is  pre- 
sent ?  Who,  that  he  is  nigh  ?""  What  need  is  there 
that  any  one  should  importune  Indra  for  his  son,  his 
elephant,  his  property,  his  person,  or  his  people  ? 

18.  Who  praises  the  (sacrificial)  fire,  (lighted  for 
Indra)  ?  Or  worships  him  with  the  oblation  of  clari- 
fied butter,  presented  in  the  ladle,  according  to  the 
constant  seasons  ?^  To  whom  do  the  gods  quickly 
bring  (the  wealth)  that  has  been  called  for  ?  What 
sacrificer,  engaged  in  ofl'ering  oblations,  and  favoui-ed 
by  the  gods,  thoroughly  knows  Indra  ? 

19.  Powerful  Indra,  be  present,  and  be  favourable 
to  the  mortal  (who  adores  thee).  There  is  no  other 
giver  of  felicity,  Maghavan,  than  thou.  Hence, 
Indra,  I  recite  thy  praise. 

20.  Grantor  of  dwellings,  let  not  thy  treasury, 
let  not  thy  benefits,'  ever  be  detrimental  to  us. 
Friend  of  mankind,  bring  to  us,  who  are  acquainted 
with  prayers,  all  sorts  of  riches. 

*  That  is,  we  know  it  very  well,  and  are,  therefore,  secure  in 
his  presence,  at  this  ceremony.  Or  kah  may  again  be  explained 
by  Prajdpati,  with  the  sense  of  the  stanza  modified  accordingly. 

^  Ritubhir  dhruvebhik  ;  in  which,  ritii  may  have  its  ordinary 
sense  of  '  season.'  Or  the  passage  may  mean,  '  presented  by  the 
divinities  called  Ritiis,  who  preside  over  sacrifices,'  as  in  the  text 
Ritavo  vai  prai/djuh, — The  Ritiis  are  the  chief  sacrifices,  i.e., 
2)raydjadevatdh,  the  deities  presiding  over  them. 

"  Utmjah,  benefits,  assistances :  but  it  may  be  read  dhutayah, 
shakers,  agitators,  i.e.,  the  Maruts,  or  Winds. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  219 


ANUVAKA    XIV. 

Si5kta  I.  (LXXXV). 

The  deities  are  the  Makuts  ;  the  Rishi,  Gotama  :  the  ipetre  of 
the  fifth  and  twelfth  verses  is  Trisht'iibh  ;  of  the  rest,  Jagat'i. 

1.  The  Maeuts,  who  are  going  forth,    decorate    Varga  ix. 
themselves  like  females :  they  are  gliders  (through 

the  air),  the  sons  of  Eudra,  and  the  doers  of 
good  works,  by  which  they  promote  the  welfare  of 
earth  and  heaven.  Heroes,  who  grind  (the  solid 
rocks),  they  delight  in  sacrifices. 

2.  They,  inaugurated  by  the  gods,^  have  attained 
majesty :  the  sons  of  Eudra  have  established  their 
dwelling  above  the  sky  :  glorifying  him  (Indra,) 
who  merits  to  be  glorifi.ed,  they  have  inspired  him 
with  vigour :  the  sons  of  Prisni  have  acquired 
dominion. 

3.  When  the  sons  of  earth ^  embellish  themselves 
with  ornaments,  they  shine  resplendent,  in  their 
persons,  with  (brilliant)  decorations :  they  keep 
aloof  every  adversary :  the  waters  follow  their 
path." 

4.  They,  who  are  worthily  worshipped,  shine  with 

"   TJlcshitusah,  wetted,  sprinkled  with  holy  water  by  the  gods, —   ' 
devair  ahhishiJddh. 

^  Here  they  are  called  gomatarah,  having,  for  their  mother, 
the  cow  ;  that  is,  the  earth,  under  that  type, — equivalent  to  Prisni 
in  the  preceding  stanza. 

•^  That  is,  rain  follows  the  wind. 


220  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

various  weapons :  incapable  of  being  overthrown, 
they  are  the  overthrowers  (of  mountains).  Maruts, 
swift  as  thought,  entrusted  with  the  duty  of  sending 
rain,  yoke  the  spotted  deer  to  your  cars. 

5.  "When,  Maeuts,  urging  on  the  cloud,  for  the 
sake  of  (providing)  food,  you  have  yoked  the  deer 
to  your  chariots,  the  drops  fall  from  the  radiant" 
(sun),  and  moisten  the  earth,  like  a  hide,  with 
water. 

6.  Let  your  quick-paced,  smooth-gliding  coursers 
bear  you  (hither) ;  and,  moving  swiftly,  come,  with 
your  hands  (filled  with  good  things).  Sit,  Maruts, 
upon  the  broad  seat  of  sacred  grass,  and  regale 
yourselves  with  the  sweet  sacrificial  food. 

Var'va  X.  ^'  Confiding  in  their  own  strength,  they  have 
increased  in  (power) :  they  have  attained  heaven 
by  their  greatness,  and  have  made  (for  themselves,) 
a  spacious  abode.  May  they,  for  whom  Yishnu 
defends  (the  sacrifice)  that  bestows  all  desires  and 
confers  delight,  come,  (quickly,)  like  birds,  and  sit 
down  upon  the  pleasant  and  sacred  grass. 

8.  Like  heroes,  like  combatants,  like  men 
anxious  for  food,  the  swift-moving  (Maruts)  have 
engaged  in  battles.  All  beings  fear  the  Maruts, 
who  are  the  leaders  (of  the  rain),  and  awful  of 
aspect,  like  princes. 

9.  Indra  wields  the   well-made,    golden,  many- 

*  Arusha  is  tlie  term  of  the  text, — '  the  radiant,'  which  may- 
apply  cither  to  the  sun  or  to  the  Agni  of  lightning  ;  either  heing, 
in  like  manner,  the  source  of  rain. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  221 

bladed  thunderbolt,  which  the  skilful  Twashtri^ 
has  framed  for  him,  that  he  may  achieve  great 
exploits  in  war.  He  has  slain  Vritra,  and  sent 
forth  an  ocean  of  water. 

10.  By  their  power,  they  bore  the  well  aloft,  and 
clove  asunder  the  mountain  that  obstructed  their 
path.  The  munificent  Maruts,  blowing  upon  their 
pipe,^  have  conferred,  when  exhilarated  by  the 
Soma  juice,  desirable  (gifts  upon  the  sacrificer). 

11.  They  brought  the  crooked  well  to  the  place 
(where  the  Muni  was),  and  sprinkled  the  water 
upon  the  thirsty  Gotama."  The  variously-radiant 
(Maruts)  come  to  his  succour,  gratifying  the  desire 
of  the  sage  with  life-sustaining  (waters). 

12.  Whatever  blessings  (are  diffused)  through 
the  three  worlds,  and  are  in  your  gift,  do  you 
bestow  upon  the  donor  (of  the  oblation),  who  ad- 
dresses you  with  praise.  Bestow  them,  also,  Maruts, 
upon  us ;  and  grant  us,  bestowers  of  all  good,  riches, 
whence  springs  prosperity. 

*  Twasht'ri  here  reverts  to  his  usual  office  of  artisan  of  the 
gods. 

^  Dhamanto  vdnam.  The  Scholiast  explains  vdnam  to  be  a 
lute,  a  v'lnu  with  a  hundred  strings;  a  sort  of  -^olian  harp, 
perhaps.  Dliamanta,  '  blowing,'  would  better  apply  to  a  pipe,  a 
wind-instrument. 

"  In  this  and  the  next  stanza,  allusion  is  made  to  a  legend 
in  which  it  is  related,  that  the  liishi  Gotama,  being  thirsty, 
prayed  to  the  Maruts  for  relief,  who,  thereupon,  brought  a  well, 
from  a  distance,  to  his  hermitage.  This  exploit  is  subsequently 
{Suhta  CXVI.)  related  of  the  Aswins. 


222  RIG-YEDA    SANHITA. 


Si5kta  II.  (LXXXVI.) 

Rishi  and  deities,  the  same  ;  the  metre  is  Gdyatr'i. 

Varga  XI.  1.  TliG  man  in  wliose  mansion,  resplendent 
Martjts,  descending  from  the  sky,  you  drink  (the 
libation)  is  provided  with  most  able  protectors. 

2.  Maruts,  bearers  of  oblations,  hear  the  invo- 
cation of  the  praises  of  the  worshipper  with  or 
(without)  sacrifices.'* 

3.  And  may  he  for  whom  ministrant  priests  have 
sharpened^  the  sapient  (troop  of  the  Martjts)  walk 
among  pastures  crowded  with  cattle. 

4.  The  libation  is  poured  out  for  the  hero  (-band), 
at  the  sacrifice,  on  the  appointed  days ;  and  the 
hymn  is  repeated ;  and  their  joy  (is  excited). 

5.  May  the  Maruts,  victorious  over  all  men, 
hear  (the  praises)  of  this  (their  worshipper) ;  and 
may  (abundant)  food  be  obtained  by  him  who  praises 
them. 

Varga  XII.  6.  Eujoyiug  the  protection  of  you  who  behold 
all  things,  we  have  offered  you,  Maruts,  (oblations,) 
for  many  years. 

7.  Maruts,  who  are  to  be  especially  worshipped, 
may  the  man  whose  offering  you  accept  be  ever 
prosperous. 

8.  Possessors  of  true  vigour,  be  cognizant  of  the 


"■  The  expression  is  yajnair  vu,  *  with  sacrifices,  or : '  the 
'without'  is  supplied  by  the  Scholiast. 

^  Atakshata,  have  sharpened,  «',  e.,  have  excited,  or  animated, 
by  their  offerings. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  223 

wishes  of  him  who  praises  you,  and  toils  in  your 
service,  desirous  of  (your  favour). 

9.  Possessors  of  true  vigour,  you  have  displayed 
your  might,  with  the  lustre  (of  which)  you  have 
destroyed  the  RaJcshasas. 

10.  Dissipate  the  concealing  darkness  :  drive 
away  every  devouring  (foe) :  show  us  the  light  we 
long  for. 

St5kta  III.  (LXXXVII.) 
RisJti  and  deities  as  before;  metre,  Jagat'i. 

1.  Annihilators  (of  adversaries),  endowed  with  Varga  xiii. 
great  strength,  loud-shouting,  unbending,  insepara- 
ble^ partakers  of  the  evening  oblation,^  constantly 
worshipped,  and  leaders  (of  the  clouds),  (the 
Maruts),  by  their  personal'  decorations,  are  con- 
spicuous (in  the  sky),  like  certain  rays  of  the  sun. 

^  Always  associated  in  troops. 

^  The  term  is  rij'isMnah,  which  is  not  very  clearly  explained. 
Rij'isM,  in  ordinary  use,  means  a  frying-pan ;  but  here  the 
Scholiast  seems  to  consider  it  as  a  synonym  of  Soma ;  the 
Maruts  being  thus  named,  because  they  are  entitled,  at  the  third 
daily  ceremonial,  or  the  evening  worship,  to  a  share  of  the 
effusion  of  the  rij'isJia, — rifishasydhhishavdt.  Or  the  term  may 
signify,  he  adds,  *  the  acquirers  or  receivers  of  the  juices,' — 
prdrjayitdro  rasdndm ;  from  arj,  to  acquire.  Eosen  has  lance 
sacrifica  culti ;  M.  Lacglois,  amis  denos  offrandes. 

*  Strihhih,  covering,  or  clothing ;  from  stri,  to  cover ;  an 
epithet  of  rt?yV57«"^,  ornaments :  swamrirasydclicliliddaluilr  *  *  dhha- 
ranaih, — with  ornaments  covering  their  own  persons.  As  the 
word  is  separated  from  the  substantive,  however,  by  the  inter- 


224  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

2.  When,  Maruts,  flying,  like  birds,  along  a 
certain  path  (of  the  sky),  you  collect  the  moving 
passing  (clouds),  in  the  nearest  portions  (of  the 
firmament),  then,  coming  into  collision  with  your 
cars,  they  pour  forth  (the  waters).  Therefore  do  you 
shower  upon  your  worshipper  the  honey-coloured 
rain.'' 

3.  When  they  assemble  (the  clouds),  for  the  good 
work,  earth  trembles  at  their  impetuous  movements, 
like  a  wife  (whose  husband  is  away) :  sportive, 
capricious,  armed  with  bright  weapons,  and  agitat- 
ing (the  solid  rocks),  they  manifest  their  inherent 
might. 

4.  The  troop  of  Maruts  is  self-moving,  deer- 
borne,  ever  young,  lords  of  this  (earth),  and  invested 
with  vigour.  You,  who  are  sincere  liberators  from 
debt,^  irreproachable,  and  shedders  of  rain,  are  the 
protectors  of  this  our  rite. 

5.  We  declare,  by  our  birth  from  our  ancient  sire, 
that  the  tongue  (of  praise)  accompanies  the  mani- 
festing (invocation  of  the  Maruts),  at  the  libations 

vening  simile,  "  like  some  rays  "  {he  chid  usrd  iva),  it  has  been 
understood  in  a  different  sense  by  former  translators.  Thus, 
Rosen  has  ornamentis  dignoscuntur,  rari  lucis  radii  velut  qui 
stellis  effunduntur ;  and  M.  Langlois,  {les  Marouts)  hrillent  sous 
leurs  parures,  comme  les  nuages  sous  les  feux  des  etoiles:  but 
strihhih  cannot  have  any  relation  to  stars. 

"  Madhuvarnam,  '  having  the  colour  of  honey  ; '  or,  according 
to  the  commentator,  being  equally  pure  or  pellucid  {swach- 
chha. 

"  By  making  their  worshippers  wealthy. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHTATA.  225 

of  the  Soma',  for,  masmuch  as  they  stood  by,. en- 
couraging Indra  in  the  conflict,  they  have  acquired 
names  that  are  to  be  recited  at  sacrifices. 

6.  Combining  with  the  solar  rays,  they  have 
willingly  poured  down  (rain),  for  the  welfare  (of 
mankind),  and,  hymned  by  the  priests,  have  been 
pleased  partakers  of  the  (sacrificial  food).  Addressed 
with  praises,  moving  swiftly,  and  exempt  from  fear, 
they  have  become  possessed  of  a  station  agreeable 
and  suitable  to  the  Maruts. 

Si^KTA  IV.  (LXXXVIII.) 

Itishi  and  deity,  as  before  :  the  metre  of  the  first  and  last  stanzas, 
Prastdrapanhti ;  of  the  fifth,  VirdSrupd  ;  and,  of  the  rest, 
Trishdibh. 

1.  Come,    Maruts,'*   with   your   brilliant,    light-    Varga  xiv, 
moving,    well-weaponed,   steed-harnessed,  chariots. 

Doers  of  good  deeds,  descend,  like  birds,  (and  bring 
us)  abundant  food. 

2.  To  what  glorifier  (of  the  gods)  do  they  repair, 


*  The  Scholiast  here  proposes  various  etymologies  of  the 
name  Manet,  some  of  which  are  borrowed  from  Ydska,  Nir., 
XI.,  13.  They  sound  {ruvanti,  from  ru),  having  attained  mid- 
heaven  [mttam) ;  or.  They  sound  without  measure  [amitam) ; 
or,  They  shine  (from  ruch),  in  the  clouds  made  {mitam)  by  them- 
selves ;  or.  They  hasten  {dravanti)  in  the  sky.  All  the  minor 
divinities  that  people  the  mid-air  are  said,  in  the  Vedas,  to  be 
styled  Maruts :  as  in  the  text,  "  All  females  whose  station  is  the 
middle  heaven,  the  all-pervading  masculine  Vdyu,  and  all  the 
troops  (of  demigods),  are  Maruts.''''  Sdyana  also  cites  the 
Paurdiiik  tradition  of  the  birth  of  the  forty-nine  Maruts,  in  seven 
troops,  as  the  sons  of  Kabjapa  {  Vishnu  Fur  ana,  p.  152). 

19 


226  RIG-VEDA    SANHItA. 

with  their  ruddy,  tawny,  car-bearing  horses,  for  his 
advantage  ?  Bright  as  burnished  (gold),  and  armed 
with  the  thunderbolt,  they  furrow  the  earth  with 
their  chariot-wheels. 

3.  Maeuts,  the  threatening  (weapons)  are  upon 
your  persons,  (able  to  win)  dominion :  (to  you)  they 
raise  lofty  sacrifices,  like  (tall)  trees.  Well-born 
Maeuts,  for  you  do  wealthy  worshippers  enrich 
the  stone  (that  grinds  the  Soma  plant). 

4.  Fortunate  days  have  befallen  you,  (sons  of 
Gotama),  when  thirsty,  and  have  given  lustre  to 
the  rite  for  which  water  was  essential.  The  sons 
of  GoTAMA,  (oifering)  oblations  with  sacred  hymns, 
have  raised  aloft  the  well  (provided)  for  their 
dwelling.'' 

5.  This  hymn  is  known  to  be  the  same  as  that 
which  GoTAMA  recited,  Maeuts,  in  your  (praise), 
when  he  beheld  you  seated  in  your  chariots  with 
golden  wheels,  armed  with  iron  weapons,  hurrying 
hither  and  thither,  and  destroying  your  mightiest 
foes. 

6.  This  is  that  praise,  Maeuts,  which,  suited 
(to  your  merits),  glorifies  every  one  of  you.  The 
speech  of  the  priest  has  now  glorified  you,  without 
difiiculty,  with  sacred  verses,  since  (you  have  placed) 
food  in  our  hands. 


See  note  c,  p.  221. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  227 


SijKTA  V.  (LXXXIX.) 

The  Rishi,  as  before,  Gotama;  but  the  hymn  is  addressed  to  the 
VisWADEVAS.  The  metre  of  the  first  five  stanzas,  and  of  the 
seventh,  is  Jagat'i ;  of  the  sixth,  Virdt'sthdnd ;  and,  of  the  last 
three,  Trishtubh. 

1.  May    auspicious    works,    unmolested,    unim-    ^arga  xv. 
peded,   and  subversive  (of  foes),  come  to  us  from 

every  quarter.  May  the  gods,  turning  not  away 
from  us,  but  granting  us  protection  day  by  day,  be 
ever  with  us,  for  our  advancement. 

2.  May  the  benevolent  favour  of  the  gods  (be 
ours) :  may  the  bounty  of  the  gods,  ever  approving 
of  the  upright,  light  upon  us :  may  we  obtain  the 
friendship  of  the  gods ;  and  may  the  gods  extend 
our  days  to  longevity. 

3.  We  invoke  them  with  an  ancient  text," — 
Bhaga,  Mitra,  Aditi,  Daksha,  Asridh,  Aryaman, 
Varuna,  Soma,  the  Aswins  :  and  may  the  gracious 
Saraswati  grant  us  happiness.^ 

*  Pitrvayd  nividd.  Nivid  is  a  synonym  of  vdch,  speech,  or  a 
text, — here  said  to  be  a  text  of  the  Veda. 

^  Most  of  these,  here  included  amongst  the  Visivadevas,  have 
occurred  before.  But  the  Scholiast  here  also  explains  their 
functions : — Bhaga  and  Mitra  are  Adityas  ;  and  the  latter  is, 
especially,  the  lord  of  day,  as  by  the  text  Maitram  vd  ahah, — The 
day  is  dependent  on  Mitra.  Aditi  is  the  mother  of  the  gods ; 
DaJcsha  is  called  a  Prajdpati,  able  to  make  the  world  :  or,  he  is 
the  creator  {Iliranyagarhha),  diffused  among  breathing  or  living- 
creatures,  as  breath,  or  life  ;  as  by  the  text  Prdiio  vai  Dahshah, — 
Daksha,  verily,  is  breath.     Asridh,  from  sridh,  to  dry  up  ;    uu- 


228  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

4.  May  the  wind  waft  to  us  the  grateful  medi- 
cament :  ^  may  mother  earth,  may  father  heaven, 
(convey)  it  (to  us):^  may  the  stones  that  express 
the  Soma  juice,  and  are  productive  of  pleasure, 
(bring)  it  (to  us).  AswiNS,  who  are  to  be  meditated 
upon,  hear  (our  application). 

5.  We  invoke  that  lord  of  living  beings,  that 
protector  of  things  immoveable,  Indra,  who  is  to 
be  propitiated  by  pious  rites,  for  our  protection. 
As  PusHAN  has  ever  been  our  defender,  for  the 
increase  of  our  riches,  so  may  he  (continue)  the 
unmolested  guardian  of  our  welfare. 


drying,  unchanging ;  tliat  is,  the  class  of  Hands.  Aryaman  is 
the  sun,  as  by  the  test  Asau  vd  dditijd'  ryamd, — He,  the  sun,  is 
Aryaman.  Varuna  is  named  from  vri,  to  surround,  encompassing 
the  wicked  with  his  bonds  :  he  is,  also,  the  lord  of  night,  as  by 
the  text  Vdruii'i  rdtrih, — The  night  is  dependent  on  Varuna. 
Soma  is  twofold ;  the  jjlant  so  called  on  earth,  and  the  moon,  as  a 
divinity  in  heaven.  The  Akcins  are  so  termed,  either  from 
having  horses  {aswavaiitau) ;  or  from  pervading  all  things,  the 
one,  with  moisture,  the  other,  with  light,  according  to  YdsJca,  who 
also  states  the  question :  Who  were  they  ?  which  is  thus  answered  : 
According  to  some,  they  are  heaven  and  earth  ;  to  others,  day  and 
night;  according  to  others,  the  sun  and  moon;  and,  according 
to  the  traditionists  {aitihdsika),  they  were  two  virtuous  priaces.-^ 
NiruUa,  XII.,  1. 

*  Bheshajam ;  that  medicament  Avhich  the  Aswins^  as  the 
physicians  of  the  gods,  are  qualified  to  bestow.  No  other  specifi- 
cation is  given. 

*"  Earth  is  so  termed,  as  producing  all  things  necessary  for 
life;  and  heaven,  as  sending  rain,  and,  therefore,  indirectly 
nourishing  aU  thinss. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA— SIXTH    ADHTATA.  229 

6.  May  Indea,  who  listens  to  much  praise,  guard    Varga  xvi. 
our  welfare :  may  Pushan,  who  knows  all  things, 

guard  our  welfare :    may  Tarkshta,''  with  unble- 
mished weapons,  guard  our  welfare. 

7.  May  the  Maruts,  whose  coursers  are  spotted 
deer,  who  are  the  sons  of  Prisxi,  gracefully-moving, 
frequenters  of  sacrifices,  (seated)  on  the  tongue  of 
Agni,^  regarders  (of  all),  and  radiant  as  the  sun, — 
may  all  the  gods, — come  hither  for  our  preservation. 

8.  Let  us  hear,  gods,  with  our  ears,  what  is  good; 
objects  of  sacrifice,  let  us  see,  with  our  eyes,  what  is 
good :  let  us,  engaged  in  your  praises,  enjoy,  with  firm 
limb  and  (sound)  bodies,  the  term  of  life  granted 
by  the  gods." 

*  Tdrkshya  is  a  patronymic,  implying  son  of  Trihha,  and, 
according  to  the  Scholiast,  Garutman.  He  is  termed,  in  the  text, 
Arisht'anemi, — he  who  has  unharmed  or  irresistible  {arisht'a) 
weapons  {nenii)  :  or  the  latter  may  imply,  as  usual,  the  circum- 
ference of  a  wheel, — whose  chariot-wheel  is  unimpeded.  But 
ArisManemi  occurs,  in  the  Vdyu  Purdria,  as  the  name  of  a 
Prajdpati,  so  that  the  passage  might  mean  ArisManemi,  the  son 
of  Triksha,  which,  according  to  some  authorities,  is  a  name  of 
the  patriarch  Kasyapa :  the  same  make  Tdrkshya  a  synonym  of 
Aruua,  the  personified  dawn.  It  is  doubtful  if  we  have  any 
reference  to  the  vehicle  of  Vishnu,  GaruRa. 

^  This  may  he  predicated  of  all  the  deities ;  as  they  receive 
oblations  through  the  month  of  Aym. 

*=  Devahitam;  whence  it  may  be  rendered,  as  the  Scholiast 
proposes,  in  the  singular;  understanding,  by  deva,  Prajdpati, 
either  a  patriarch  or  Brahnd.  The  Commentator  says,  the 
limit  of  human  life  is  116  or  120  years;  but  the  next  stanza 
specifies  a  centuiy. 


230  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

9.  Since  a  hundred  years  were  appointed  (for 
the  life  of  man),  interpose  not,  gods,  in  the  midst 
of  our  passing  existence,  by  inflicting  infirmity  on 
our  bodies,  so  that  our  sons  become  our  sires.^ 

10.  Aditi^  is  heaven;  Aditi  is  the  firmament; 
Aditi  is  mother,  father,  and  son  ;  Aditi  is  all  the 
gods;  Aditi  is  the  five  classes  of  men  ;'  Aditi  is 
generation  and  birth. '^ 

SUKTA    VI.    (XC.) 

The  Rishi  and  deities  are  the  same ;  the  metre  is  Gdyatn,  except 
in  the  last  stanza,  where  it  is  AnusMuhh. 

Vargaxvii.  L  May  Varuna  and  the  wise  Mitra  lead  us, 
by  straight  paths,  (to  our  desires), — and  Artaman/ 
rejoicing  with  the  gods. 

*  That  is,  let  us  not  become  so  feeble  and  infirm  as  to  be,  as 
it  were,  infants,  and  to  require  the  paternal  care  of  our  own  sons. 

^  Aditi,  literally  meaning  the  independent  or  the  indivisible, 
may,  here,  signify  either  the  earth  or  the  mother  of  the  gods, 
according  to  the  Scholiast.  According  to  Ydska,  the  hymn  declares 
the  might  of  Aditi, — Aditer  vilhiUim  dchasMe  {Nir.,  lY.,  23) ;  or, 
as  Sat/ana,   "  Aditi  is  hymned  as  the  same  with  the  universe." 

^  As  before  noticed,  the  five  orders  of  men  are  said  to  be  the 
four  castes  and  the  outcastes.  It  is  also  interpreted,  five  classes 
of  beings,  or,  Gods,  Men,  Gandharvas  (including  Apsarasas). 
Serpents,  and  Pitris ;  or,  as  it  occurs  in  the  Niruhta,  III.,  7, 
Gandharvas,  Pitris,   Gods,  Asuras,  and  Rahshasas, 

^  Jdta  is  the  actual  birth  of  beings;  janitwa,  the  faculty  of 
being  born,  generation.  Rosen  renders  the  terms,  natum  and 
nasciturum. 

*  Aryaman  is  said  to  be  the  sun,  in  his  fanction  of  separating 
day  from  night. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA— SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  231 

2.  For  tliey  are  the  distributors  of  wealth  (over 
the  world),  and,  never  heedless,  discharge  their 
functions  every  day. 

3.  May  they,  who  are  immortal,  bestow,  upon  us 
mortals,  happiness,  annihilating  our  foes. 

4.  May  the  adorable  Indea,  the  Maruts,  Pushan, 
and  Bhaga,  so  direct  our  paths,  (that  they  may  lead) 
to  the  attainment  of  good  gifts. 

6.  PusH^v:!^,  YiSHNU,"*  Maruts,^  make  our  rites 
restorative  of  our  cattle ;  make  us  prosperous. 

6.  The    winds    bring    sweet    (rewards)   to    the  Vargaxviii. 
sacrificer ;  the  rivers  bring  sweet  (waters).   May  the 

herbs  yield  sweetness  to  us. 

7.  May  night  and  morn  be  sweet;  may  the 
region  of  the  earth  be  full  of  sweetness ;  may  the 
protecting  heaven  be  sweet  to  us. 

8.  May  Vanaspati  be  possessed  of  sweetness 
towards  us  ;  may  the  sun  be  imbued  with  sweetness ; 
may  the  cattle  be  sweet  to  us. 

9.  May  Mitra  be  propitious  to  us  ;  may  Vartjna, 
may  Aryaman,  be  propitious  to  us ;  may  Indra  and 
Briiiaspati  be  propitious  to  us;  may  the  wide- 
stepping  YiSHNU  be  propitious  to  us. 


*  Vishnu  13  said  to  mean  the  pervader,  or  pervading  deity. 

''  The  term  of  the  text  is  evaydvah,  which  is  explained,  by  the 
Scholiast,  the  troop  of  Maruts,  from  their  going  with  horses 
{evaih). 


232  EIG-VEDA   SANHITA." 


SUKTA   VII.    (XCI.) 

The  Rishi  is,  still,  Gotama;  the  deity  is  Soma:  from  the  fifth 
to  the  sixteenth  stanza,  the  metre  is  Gdyatri ;  the  seventeenth, 
C7s/??u7« ;  the  rest,  TrisM'ubh. 

VargaXix.  1.  Thou,  SoMA,  art  thoroughly  apprehended  by 
our  understanding  ;  thou  leadest  us  along  a  straight 
path.  By  thy  guidance,  Indra,  our  righteous  fathers 
obtained  wealth  amongst  the  gods. 

2.  Thou,  Soma,  art  the  doer  of  good  by  holy 
acts ;  thou  art  powerful,  by  thine  energies,  and 
knowest  all  things  ;  thou  art  the  showerer  (of 
benefits),  by  thy  bounties,  and  (art  great,)  by  thy 
greatness :  thou,  the  guide  of  men,  hast  been  well 
nourished  by  sacrificial  ofi'erings. 

3.  Thy  acts  are  (like  those)  of  the  royal  Varuna  :* 


■*  Rdjnah  *  te  Varunasya.  The  Scholiast  would  seem  to  argue 
that  Varuna  here  means  that  which  is  enclosed  in  a  cloth,  or  the 
Soma  plant  that  has  been  purchased  for  a  sacrifice, — ydgdrtham 
dhritah  hr'ito  vastreiidvritah  Somo  Varunah,  chiefly  because  Soma 
is  the  king  of  the  Brahmans ;  as  by  the  text  of  the  Veda,  Somo 
^smdkam  Brdhmandndni  rdj'd, — Soma  is  the  king  of  us  Brahmans ; 
and  Somardjdno  Brdhmaiiah, — The  Brahmans  have  Soma  for  king. 
But,  in  that  sense,  the  moon,  not  the  plant,  is  usually  understood 
by  Soma;  and  there  does  not  appear  any  reason  for  understanding 
the  term  Varuna  in  any  other  than  its  usual  acceptation.  The 
title  of  rdjd,  we  have  akeady  seen,  is,  not  unfrequently,  assigned 
to  him,  although,  as  the  following  stanzas  show,  it  was  equally 
given  to  Soma. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  233 

thy  glory,  Soma,  is  great  and  profound  :  thou  art 
the  purifier  (of  all),  like  the  beloved  Mitra  :  thou 
.art  the  augmenter  of  all,  like  Aryaman. 

4.  Endowed  with  all  the  glories  (that  are  dis- 
played) by  thee  in  heaven,  on  earth,  in  the  moun- 
tains, in  the  plants,  in  the  waters,  do  thou,  illus- 
trious'' Soma,  well-disposed  towards  us,  and  devoid 
of  anger,  accept  our  oblations. 

5.  Thou,  Soma,  art  the  protector,  the  sovereign 
of  the  pious,''  or  even  the  slayer  of  Yritra  ;  thou 
art  holy  sacrifice/ 

6.  Thou,  Soma,  fond  of  praise,  the  lord  of  plants,     Varga  xx. 
art  life  to  us.    If  thou  wilt,  we  shall  not  die. 

7.  Thou  bestowest,  Soma,  upon  him  who  worships 
thee,  whether  old  or  young,  wealth,  that  he  may 
enjoy,  and  live. 

8.  Defend  us,  royal  Soma,  from  every  one  seeking 
to  harm  us.  The  friend  of  one  like  thee  can  never 
perish. 

9.  Soma,  be  our  protector  with  those  assistances 
which  are  sources  of  happiness  to  the  donor  (of 
oblations). 

10.  Accepting   this  our   sacrifice,   and   this   our 


*  Or  royal  (rdjan)  Soma. 

^  Satpatis  twain  rdjota.  Sat  may  be  explained,  also,  according 
to  the  Scholiast,  by  Brahman,  making  the  sentence,  "  the  protector, 
or  lord  {pati),  or  the  king  {raja),  of  the  Brahmans." 

=  Soma  may  be  considered  as  identifiable  vrith  sacrifice,  from 
the  essential  part  it  performs  in  it  {tadriipo  Ihavati,  sddhjatwdd 
yajndndm). 


234  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

praise,  approacli,  Soma,  and  be,  to  us,  as  the  aug- 
menter  of  our  rite. 
Vargaxxi.         11.   Acquainted    with   hymns,    we    elevate   thee 
with  praises.    Do  thou,  who  art  benignant,  approach. 

12.  Be,  unto  us,  Soma,  the  bestower  of  wealth, 
the  remover  of  disease,  the  cognizant  of  riches,  the 
augmenter  of  nutriment,  an  excellent  friend. 

13.  Soma,  dwell  happy  in  our  hearts,  like  cattle 
in  fresh  pastures,  like  men  in  their  own  abodes. 

14.  The  experienced  sage  commends  the  mortal 
who,  through  affection,  divine  Soma,  praises  thee. 

15.  Protect  us.  Soma,  from  calumny  ;  preserve 
us  from  sin  :  pleased  with  our  service,  be  our 
friend. 

Varga  XXII.  16.  Increase,  Soma.  May  vigour  come  to  thee 
from  every  side.  Be  diligent  in  the  supply  of  food 
(to  us). 

17.  Exulting  Soma,  increase  with  all  twining 
plants :  be,  to  us,  a  friend.  Well-supplied  with  food, 
we  may  prosper. 

18.  May  the  milky  juices  flow  around  thee  :  may 
sacrificial  offerings  and  vigour  be  concentrated  in 
the  destroyer  of  foes ;  and,  being  fully  nourished, 
do  thou  provide,  Soma,  excellent  viands  in  heaven, 
for  our  immortality. 

19.  Whichever  of  thy  glories  (men)  worship 
with  oblations,  may  our  sacrifice  bo  invested  with 
them  all.  Come  to  our  mansions.  Soma,  who  art 
the  bestower  of  wealth,  the  transporter  (over 
difiiculties),  attended  by  valiant  heroes,  the  noh- 
destroyer  of  progeny. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA— SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  235 

20.  To  him  who  presents  (offerings)  Soma  gives 
a  milch-cow,  a  swift  horse,  and  a  son  who  is  able 
in  affairs,  skilful  in  domestic  concerns,  assiduous  in 
worship,  eminent  in  society,  and  who  is  an  honour 
to  his  father. 

21.  We   rejoice.   Soma,  contemplating   thee,   in-  Varga  xxiii. 
vincible  in  battle,   triumphant  amongst  hosts,   the 
grantor  of  heaven,  the  giver  of  rain,  the  preserver 

of   strength,    born   amidst   sacrifices,    occupying   a 
brilliant  dwelling,  renowned,  and  victorious. 

22.  Thou,  Soma,  hast  generated  all  these  herbs, 
the  water,  and  the  kine ;  thou  hast  spread  out  the 
spacious  firmament ;  thou  hast  scattered  darkness 
with  light. 

23.  Divine  and  potent  Soma,  bestow,  upon  us, 
with  thy  brilliant  mind,  a  portion  of  wealth  :  may 
no  (adversary)  annoy  thee.  Thou  art  supreme  over 
the  valour  of  (any)  two  (mutual)  opponents.  Defend 
us  (from  our  enemies,)  in  battle.^ 

Si5kta    VIII.  (XCII.) 
The  Rishi  is  Gotama  :  the  deity  is  Ushas  (the  Dawn),  except  in 
the  last  triad,  which  is  addressed  to  the  Aswins  :    the  metre 
of  the  first  four  verses  is  Jagat'i ;  of  the  last  six,  Ushnih ;  of  the 
rest,  TrisMuhh, 

1.  These  divinities  of  the  morning ''  have  spread  vaigaxxi v. 


*  There  is,  evidently,  great  confusion,  in  this  hymn,  between 
Soma,  the  moon,  and  Soma,  the  acid  Asclepias.  Few  passages 
indicate  the  former  distinctly,  except,  perhaps,  verse  twenty-two, 
which  alludes  to  the  function  of  scattering  darkness  by  light. 

''  We  have  the  term  Ushasah,  in  the  plural,  intending,  according 


236  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

light  (over  the  world)  :  they  make  manifest  the 
light  in  the  eastern  portion  of  the  firmament, 
brightening  all  things,  like  warriors  burnishing 
their  weapons  :  the  radiant  and  progressing  mothers" 
(of  the  earth),  they  travel  daily,  (on  their  course). 

2.  Their  purple  rays  have  readily  shot  upwards  ; 
they  have  yoked  the  easily-yoked  and  ruddy  kine 
(to  their  car) ;  the  deities  of  the  dawn  have  re- 
stored, as  of  yore,  the  consciousness  (of  sentient 
creatures),  and,  bright-rayed,  have  attended  upon 
the  glorious  sun. 

3.  The  female  leaders  (of  the  morning)  illu- 
minate,^ with  their  inherent  radiance,  the  remotest 
parts  (of  the  heaven),  with  a  simultaneous  effort, — 
like  warriors'  (with  their  shining  arms,  in  the  van 
of  battle), — bringing  every  kind  of  food  to  the  per- 
former of  good  works,  to  the  bountiful,  and  to  the 
worshipper  who  presents  libations. 

4.  UsHAS  cuts  off  the  accumulated  (glooms) ;  as 


to  the  Commentator,  the  divinities  that  preside  over  the  morning : 
but,  according  to  YdsJca,  the  plural  is  used  honorifically  only,  for 
the  singular  personification. — Nirulcta,  XII.,  7. 

*  Or  Jwa^W  may  mean  simply  maker,  author;  authors  of  Hght, — 
hhdso  nirmdtryah. — Nirulcta,  XII.,  7. 

*  Archanti ;  literallj'',  worship, — that  is,  the  heavens :  but  the 
term  is  used  for  spreading  over,  or  extending. 

=  The  text  has  only  "like  warriors."  The  Scholiast  explains  the 
comparison  :  "As  they  spread,  with  bright  arms,  along  the  front 
of  the  array,  so  the  rays  of  the  dawn  spread  along  tho  sky,  before 
the  coming  of  the  sun." 


riEST   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYATA.  237 

a  barber  (cuts  off  the  hair) :  ^  she  bares  her  bosom ; 
as  a  cow  yields  her  udder  (to  the  milker)  :  and,  as 
cattle  hasten  to  their  pastures,  she  speeds  to  the 
east,  and,  shedding  light  upon  all  the  world,  dissi- 
pates the  darkness. 

6.  Her  brilliant  light  is  first  seen  towards  (the 
east) :  it  spreads  and  disperses  the  thick  darkness. 
She  anoints  her  beauty ;  as  the  priests  anoint  the 
sacrificial  food  in  sacrifices.  The  daughter  of  the 
sky^  awaits  the  glorious  sun. 

6.  "We  have  crossed  over  the  boundary  of  dark-    Varga  xxv. 
ness.     UsHAS  restores  the  consciousness  (of  living 
beings).     Bright- shining,  she  smiles,  like  a  flatterer, 

to  obtain  favour,  and,  lovely  in  all  hor  radiance, 
she  has  swallowed,  for  our  delight,  the  darkness. 

7.  The  brilliant  daughter  of  the  sky,  the  exciter 
of  pleasant  voices,''  is  praised  by  the  descendants 
of  GoTAMA.  UsHAs,  grant  us  food,  associated  with 
progeny  and  dependants,  and  distinguished  by  horses 
and  cattle. 

8.  May  I  obtain,  Ushas,  that  ample  wealth 
which  confers  fame,  posterity,  troops  of  slaves,  and 


"  Nriiur  iva,  "like  a  barber,"  is  the  phrase  of  the  text.  Or 
nritu  may  mean  a  dancing-girl,  when  the  translation  will  be, 
"  JTs/ias  displays  graces,  like  a  dancing-girl"  [pesdnsi  vapate); 
the  former  meaning  either  darkness  or  elegance,  the  latter,  either 
to  cut  oflp,  or  to  possess.  There  is  no  point  of  similitude  expressed 
in  Rosen's  version  :   Tcnebras  dissipat  Aurora,  saltatrix  veluti.  ■ 

^  Bkah  duhitd,  the  daughter  of  heaven,  or  the  sky. 

°  With  the  appearance  of  dawn,  the  cries  of  various  animals 
and  birds,  and  the  voices  of  men,  are  again  heard. 


238  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

is  characterized  by  horses, — which  thou,  who 
aboundest  in  riches,  and  art  the  giver  of  food, 
displayest,  (when  gratified)  by  hymns  and  holy 
sacrifices. 

9.  The  divine  (Ushas),  having  lighted  up  .the 
whole  world,  spreads,  expanding  with  her  radiance, 
towards  the  west,  arousing  all  living  creatures  to 
their  labours.  She  hears  the  speech  of  all  endowed 
with  thought. 

10.  The  divine  and  ancient  Ushas,  born  again 
and  again,  and  bright  with  unchanging  hues,  wastes 
away  the  life  of  a  mortal,  like  the  wife  of  a  hunter 
cutting  up  and  dividing  the  birds/ 

Vargaxxvi.  11.  She  has  been  seen  illuminating  the  boun- 
daries of  the  sky,  and  driving  into  disappearance 
the  spontaneously-retiring  (night).''  Wearing  away 
the  ages  of  the  human  race,  she  shines  with  light, 
like  the  bride  of  the  Sun.'' 

12.  The  affluent  and  adorable  Ushas  has  sent 
her  rays  abroad, — as  (a  cowherd  drives)  the  cattle  (to 
pasture), — and  spreads,  expansive,  like  flowing  water. 

^  Like  a  swaghn'i;  literally,  the  wife  of  a  dog-kiUer,  but 
explained,  vyddhastr'i,  as  in  the  text. 

**  Swasdram  is  the  only  term  in  the  text,  explained,  sicayam 
eva  sarantim, — going  of  her  own  accord.  The  Scholiast  adds 
niffht :  otherwise,  we  might  have  understood  it  in  its  usual  sense 
of  '  sister,* — making  night  the  sister  of  morning. 

•^  Yoshd  Jdrasya.  Jdra,  meaning  the  causer  of  the  decay,  or 
disappearance,  of  night,  is  explained  by  Surya,  the  Sun. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  239 

She  is  beheld  associated  with  the  rays  of  the  sun, 
unimpeding  sacred  ceremonies.^ 

13.  UsHAS,  possessor  of  food,  bring  ns  that 
various  wealth  by  which  we  may  sustain  sons  and 
grandsons. 

14.  Luminous  Ushas,  possessor  of  cows  and 
horses,  true  of  speech,  dawn  here,  to-day,  upon  this 
(ceremony),  that  is  to  bring  us  wealth. 

15.  Possessor  of  food,  Ushas,  yoke,  indeed,  to- 
day, your  purple  steeds,  and  bring  to  us  all  good 
things. 

16.  AswiNS,  destroyers  of  foes,  turn,  with  favour-  Vaigaxxvii. 
able  intentions,  your  chariot  towards  our  abode,  which 
contains  cattle  and  gold. 

17.  AswiNS,  who  have  sent  adorable  light  from 
heaven^  to  man,  bring  us  strength. 

18.  May  the  steeds,  awakened  at  dawn,  bring 
hither,  to  drink  the  Soma  juice,  the  divine  As  wins, 
— who  are  the  givers  of  happiness,  the  destroyers  of 
foes, — seated  in  a  golden  chariot. 

*  Aminati  daivymii  vratdni,  not  injuring,  that  is,  favouring, 
divine  rites,  or  offerings  to  the  gods,  which  are  to  be  performed 
by  daylight,  or  after  dawn  ;  as  by  the  text,  Na  rdtrau  na  sdyam 
asti  devayd  ajusht'am, — Sacrifice  is  not  acceptable  to  the  gods  at 
night,  or  in  the  evening. 

"  As  before  observed,  the  Akvins  are,  sometimes,  identified 
with  the  sun  and  moon. 


Var^a 
XXVIII. 


240  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 


SiJkta  IX.  (XCIII.) 

The  Rishi  is  Gotama.  :  the  deities  are  Agni  and  Soma  :  the 
melre  of  the  three  first  stanzas  is  AnusMulh  ;  of  three, 
beginning  with  the  ninth,  Odijatr'i ;  of  the  eighth,  Jagat'i  or 
Trisht'uhh ;  and,  of  the  rest,  Trisht'uhh. 

1.  Agni  and  Soma,  showerers  (of  desires),  favour- 
ably hear  this  my  invocation,  graciously  accept  my 
hymns,  and  bestow  felicity  on  the  donor  (of  the 
oblation). 

2.  Agni  and  Soma,  grant,  to  him  who  addresses 
this  prayer  to  you  both,  store  of  cattle  with  sound 
strength,  and  good  horses. 

3.  Agni  and  Soma,  may  he  who  offers  you  the 
oblation  of  clarified  butter  enjoy  sound  strength, 
with  progeny,  through  ail  his  life. 

4.  Agni  and  Soma,  that  prowess  of  yours,  by 
which  you  have  carried  off  the  cows  that  were  the 
food  of  Pani,  is  (well-)  known  to  us.  You  have  slain 
the  offspring  of  Brisaya"  ;  and  you  have  acquired 
the  one  luminary  (the  sun"),  for  the  benefit  of  the 
many. 

"  Brisayasya  Seshah.  The  latter  is  a  synonym  of  apatya,  off- 
spring.— Nirukta,  III.,  2.  Brisaya  is  said  to  be  a  synonym  of 
Twasht'ri,  here  styled  an  Asura.  The  offspring  of  Twaslit'ri  is 
Vritra  ;  and  the  agency  of  Agni  and  Soma  in  his  death  is  ex- 
plained by  identifying  them  with  the  two  vital  airs  Prdna  and 
Apdna,  the  separation  of  which  from  Vritra  was  the  approximate 
cause  of  his  death. 

''  By  the  destruction  of  Vritra,  the  enveloping  cloud,  or 
gathered  darkness,  the  sun  was  enabled  to  appear  in  tlie  sky. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  241 

6.  You  two,  Agni  and  Soma,  acting  together, 
have  sustained  these  constellations  in  the  sky  :  you 
have  liberated  the  rivers  that  had  been  defiled,  from 
the  notorious  imputation.'' 

6.  Agni  and  Soma,  the  wind  brought  one  of  you 
from  heaven ;  a  hawk  carried  off  the  other,  by  force, 
from  the  summit  of  the  mountain :  ^'  growing  vast 
by  praise,  you  have  made  the  world  wide,  for  (the 
performance  of)  sacrifice. 

7.  Agni    and    Soma,    partake   of    the   proffered  Varga  xxix. 
oblation ;  be  gracious  to  us  :  showerers  (of  desires), 

be  pleased:  prosperous  and  diligent  protectors,  be 
propitious ;  and  grant,  to  the  sacrificer,  health  and 
exemption  from  ill. 

8.  Agni  and  Soma,  protect  his  sacrifice,  and 
defend  him  from  ill,  who,  with  a  mind  devoted  to 


*  The  imputation,  or  charge,  of  Brahmanicide  was  incurred 
by  Indra,  it  is  said,  in  killing  Vritra,  who  was  a  Brahman,  but 
which  guilt  he  transferred  to  rivers,  women,  and  trees.  This  looks 
rather  like  a  Paiirunik  legend.  One  of  a  more  Vaidik  character 
is,  also,  given :  the  rivers  were  defiled  by  the  dead  body  of 
Vritra,  which  had  fallen  into  them ;  their  waters  were,  conse- 
quently, unfit  to  bear  any  part  in  sacred  rites,  until  they  were 
purified  by  Agni  and  Soma,  that  is,  by  oblations  to  fire,  and  liba- 
tions of  Soma  juice. 

"  The  legend  relates  that  Vdyu  brought  Agni  from  heaven,  at 
the  desire  of  Bhrigu,  when  performing  a  sacrifice ;  Soma  was 
brought  from  Sioarga,  on  the  top  of  Mount  Meru,  by  Guyatr'i,  in 
the  shape  of  a  hawk.  These  are,  clearly,  allegorical  allusions  to 
the  early  use  of  fire  and  the  Soma  plant  in  religious  ceremonies. 


20 


242.  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

the  gods,  worships  you  with  clarified  butter  and 
oblations:  grant  to  the  man  engaged  (in  devotion,) 
extreme  felicity. 

9.  Agni  and  Soma,  endowed  with  the  like  wealth, 
and  invoked  by  a  common  invocation,  share  our 
praises ;  for  you  have  (ever)  been  the  chief  of  the 
gods." 

10.  Agni  and  Soma,  give  ample  (recompence) 
to  him  who  presents  to  you  both  this  clarified 
butter. 

11.  Agni  and  Soma,  be  pleased  with  these  our 
oblations;  and  come  to  us,  together. 

12.  Agni  and  Soma,  cherish  our  horses ;  and  may 
our  cows,  afiPording  (milk  that  yields  butter  for) 
oblations,  be  well  nourished.  Give  to  us,  who  are 
affluent,  strength  (to  perform)  religious  rites;  and 
make  our  sacrifice  productive  of  wealth. 

ANUVAKA  XV. 

SUKTA    I.    (XCIV.) 

The  Jitshi  is  Ktjtsa,  the  son  of  Axgikas  :  the  deity  is  Agni, 
associated,  in  thi'ee  parts  of  the  eighth  stanza,  with  the  gods 
in  general,  and,  in  the  latter  half  of  the  last,  with  different 
divinities :  the  metre  of  the  two  last  stanzas  is  TrisMuhh ; 
of  the  rest,  Jagat'i. 
Varga  XXX.      1.  To   him   who   is   worthy  of  praise,    and   all- 

"■  The  term  is  simply  devatrd,  explained  devesTiu  prasastah. 
Another  text  is  quoted,  which  states  that  Agyii  and  Soma  are 
they  who  are  the  two  kings  of  the  gods  {rdjdnau  vd  etau  devd- 
ndm  yad  agnkshomau.) 


FIRST   ASHTAKA SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  243 

knowing,  we  construct,  with  our  minds,  this  hymn, 
as  (a  workman  makes)  a  car.  Happy  is  our  under- 
standing, when  engaged  in  his  adoration.  Let  us  not 
suffer  injury,  Agni,  through  thy  friendship.* 

2.  He  for  whom  thou  sacrificest  accomplishes 
(his  objects),  abides  free  from  aggression,  and  en- 
joys (wealth,  the  source  of)  strength  :  he  prospers  ; 
and  poverty  never  approaches  him.  Let  us  not  suffer 
injury,  Agni,  through  thy  friendship. 

3.  May  we  be  able  to  kindle  thee.  Perfect  the 
rite  ;  for,  through  thee,  the  gods  partake  of  the 
offered  oblations.  Bring  hither  the  Adityas  ; "  for 
we  love  them.  Let  us  not  suffer  injury,  Agni, 
through  thy  friendship. 

4.  We  bring  fuel,  we  offer  oblations,  reminding 
thee  of  the  successive  seasons  (of  worship).  Do 
thou  thoroughly  complete  the  rite,  in  order  to 
prolong  our  lives.  Let  us  not  suffer  injury,  Agni, 
through  thy  friendship. 

5.  His  genial  (flames),  the  preservers  of  man- 
kind, spread  around ;  and  both  bipeds  and  quadru- 
peds are  enlivened  by  his  rays.  Shining  with  various 
lustre,  and  illuminating  (the  world  by  night),  thou 
art  superior  to  the  dawn.  Let  us  not,  Agni,  suffer 
injury,  through  thy  friendship. 


*  This  last  clause  is  the  burden  of  all  the  stanzas  except  the 
concluding  two :  SaJchi/e  md  rishdmd  vayam  tava, — ifay  we  not 
be  injured  in,  or  by,  thy  friendship  ;  that  is,  according  to  tlie 
Scholiast,  Do  thou  preserve  us. 

^  The  sons  of  Aditi,  that  is,  all  the  gods. 


244  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

Varga  XXXI.  6.  Tlioii  art  the  sacrificing  or  the  invoking  priest ; 
thou  art  the  principal  (presenter  of  the  offering), 
the  director  (of  the  ceremonies),  their  performer, 
or,  hy  birth,  the  family-priest.''  Thus  conversant 
with  all  the  priestly  functions,  thou  performest 
perfectly  the  rite.  Let  us  not,  Agni,  suffer  injury 
through  thy  friendship. 

7.  Thou  art  of  graceful  form,  and  alike  on  every 
side,  and,  although  remote,  shinest  as  if  nigh.  Thou 
seest,  divine  Agni,  beyond  the  darkness  of  night. 
Let  us  not,  Agni,  suffer  injury  through  thy  friendship. 

8.  Gods,^  let  the  chariot  of  the  offerer  of  the 
libation  be  foremost:''  let  our  denunciations  over- 
whelm the  wicked :  understand  and  fulfil  my  words. 
Let  us  not  suffer  injury,  Agni,  through  thy  friendship. 

9.  Overcome,  with  your  fatal  (weapons),  the 
wicked   and   the   impious,    all   who    are    enemies, 

*  Agni  is  here  identified  with  the  chief  of  the  sixteen  priests 
engaged  at  solemn  sacrifices.  He  is  the  Adhivaryu,  usually 
called  the  reciter  of  the  Yajiish, — here  defined,  by  the  Scholiast, 
as  the  presenter  of  the  offerings :  he  is  the  Hoiri,  or  invoking 
priest :  he  is  the  Prasustri,  or  the  Maitrdvaruna,  whose  duty  it 
is  to  direct  the  other  priests  what  to  do,  and  when  to  perform 
their  functions :  he  is  the  Potri,  or  priest  so  termed,  and  the 
family  or  hereditary  Purohita  :  or  Purohita  may  be  the  same  as 
the  Brahma  of  a  ceremony, — being,  to  men,  what  Brihaspati  is  to 
the  gods. 

^  Devdh.  All  the  gods  are  here  considered  to  be  but  portions 
or  members  of  Agni. 

'^  Puna,  before.  The  Scholiast  explains  this  by  muhhya, 
principal :  otherwise,  it  might  be  thought  that  we  had,  here,  an 
allusion  to  chariot-races. 


^  FIRST   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYATA.  245 

whether  distant  or  near ;  and  then  provide  an  easy 
(path)  for  the  sacrificer  who  praises  thee.  Let  us 
not,  Agni,  suffer  injury  through  thy  friendship. 

10.  When  thou  hast  yoked  the  bright  red  horses, 
swift  as  the  wind,  to  thy  car,  thy  roar  is  like  that 
of  a  bull ;  and  thou  enwrappest  the  forest-trees  with 
a  banner  of  smoke.  Let  us  not,  Agni,  suffer  injury 
through  thy  friendship. 

11.  At  thy  roaring  even  the  birds  are  terrified :  Vargaxxxii. 
when  thy  flames,  consuming  the  grass,  have  spread 

in  all  directions,  (the  wood)  is  easy  of  access  to 
thee,  and  to  thy  chariots.  Let  us  not,  Agni,  suffer 
injury  through  thy  friendship. 

12.  May  this  (thy  adorer)  enjoy  the  support  of 
MiTRA  and  of  Varuna.  Wonderful  is  the  fury  of 
the  Martjts.  (Dwellers  in  the  region)  below  (the 
heavens),''  encourage  us  ;  and  may  their  minds  again 
(be  gracious)  to  us.  Let  us  not  suffer  injury,  Agni, 
through  thy  friendship. 

13.  Thou,  brilliant  (Agni),  art  the  especial  friend 
of  the  gods ;  thou,  who  art  graceful  in  the  sacrifice, 
art  the  eonfirmer  of  all  riches.  May  we  be  present 
in  thy  most  spacious  chamber  of  sacrifice.  Let  us 
not,  Agni,  suffer  injury  through  thy  friendship. 

14.  Pleasant  is  it  to  thee,  when  thou  art  lighted 
in  thine  own  abode,  and,  propitiated  by  libations, 
art  praised  (by  the  priests).  Then,  much  delighted, 
thou  givest  rewards  and  riches  to  the  worshipper. 
Let  us  not,  Agni,  suffer  injury  through  thy  friendship. 

*  Below  Swargaloha,  or  in  the  antariksha,  or  firmament. 


246  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

16  (Fortunate  is  the  worshipper)  to  whom,  (assi- 
duous) in  all  pious  works,  thou,  possessor  of  riches, 
indivisible  Agni,  grantest  exemption  from  sin, — 
whom  thou  associatest  with  auspicious  strength. 
May  he  be  (enriched),  by  thee,  with  wealth  that 
comprehends  progeny. 

16.  Do  thou,  divine  Agni,  who  knowest  what  is 
good  fortune,  on  this  occasion  prolong  our  existence ; 
and  may  Mitea,  Yaruna,  Aditi,  ocean,  earth, 
and  heaven,  preserve  it  to  us.'* 


SEVENTH    ADHYAYA. 


ANUVAKA  XV.  (continued). 

StJkta  II.  (XCV.) 

The  deity  is  Agni,  having  the  attributes  of  the  dawn,  or  the 
Agni  entitled  to  a  share  of  the  morning  oblation,  or  the  pure 
or  simple  Agni  :  the  JRishi  is  Ktjtsa  ;  the  metre,  Trisht'ulh. 

Varga  I.  1.  Two  pcriods,  of  different  complexions,^  revolve, 

"  This  verse  terminates  the  following  hymns,  with  two  ex- 
ceptions, as  far  as  the  hundred  and  first  Sukta.  Mitra,  Varnila, 
and  Aditi  have  been  before  noticed.  By  Sindlm  is  to  be  under- 
stood the  divinity  presiding  over,  or  identified  with,  flowing 
water;  and  it  may  mean  either  the  sea,  or  flowing  streams 
collectively,  or  the  river  Indus.  Pritlm'i  and  Biv  are  the  per- 
sonified earth  and  heaven.  These  are  requested  to  honour, 
meaning,  to  preserve,  or  perpetuate,  whatever  blessing  has  been 
asked  for  {tat  *  *  jndmahantam) ;  from  mah,  to  venerate  or  wor- 
ship :  tat,  that,  refers,  here,  to  dyiis,  or  life. 

*•   Virupe,  of  various  nature,  or,  here,  complexions ;  black  and 


FIRST   ASHTAKA SEVENTH  ADHYAYA.  247 

for  their  own  purposes  ;  and  each,  in  succession, 
severally  nourishes  a  son.  In  one,  Hari  is  the  re- 
ceiver of  oblations  ;  in  the  other,  the  brilliant  Agni 
is  beheld. 

2.  The  vigilant  and  youthful  Ten  beget,  through 
the  wind,  this  embryo  Agni,''  inherent  (in  all  be- 


white,  or  night  and  day.  Day  is  said  to  be  the  mother  of  fire, 
which  is  then,  as  it  were,  in  an  embryo  state,  and  is  not  fully 
manifested,  or  born,  until  it  is  dark.  So  the  sun  is  in  the  womb 
of  night,  and  is  born,  or  shines,  in  the  morning.  Hari,  or  the 
sun,  being  manifested  in  the  morning,  is  then  to  be  worshipped  ; 
Agni,  shining  at  night,  is  to  be  worshipped  in  the  evening, — 
tasmd  Agnaye  sdyam  Jiuyate  SiLrydya  prdtah,  which  is  rather  at 
variance  with  the  preliminary  statement,  that  the  Agni  of  the 
hymn  is  the  one  entitled  to  a  share  of  the  morning  oblation 
{TTshasi  prdtaMdle  havirhhdgyo  ^gnir  asti  sa  devatd)  :  therefore, 
it  is  said,  the  Agni  is  that  endowed  with  the  properties  of 
dawn  :  or  it  may  be  the  simple,  discrete  Agni  {mishasagxma- 
visisMo  ^gnih  suddho  'gtiir  vd  devatd).  We  must,  therefore, 
consider  Agni  to  be  treated  as  identical  with  Hari,  or  the  sun,  as 
well  as  referred  to  in  his  own  personification. 

*  This  stanza  is  somewhat  differently  interpreted.  The  Ten 
are  said,  by  the  Scholiast,  to  be,  in  one  acceptation,  the  ten  regions 
of  space,  which  generate  the  electrical  fire,  or  lightning,  as  an 
embryo  in  the  clouds,  through  the  agency  of  the  winds;  as 
in  the  text :  "  "Wind  is  the  cause  of  fire  ;  fire,  of  wind"  {Agner 
hi  vdyuh  hdranam,  vdyor  agnih).  The  term,  in  the  text,  for 
wind,  or  its  agency,  is  twasMuh,  which  is  here  said  to  mean 
'brilliant,' — from  "the  brilliant  central  proximity  of  wind" 
,{diptdnmadhjamdd  vdyoh  salcdsdt).  Eosen  connects  twasht'uh 
with  garhham,  and  renders  them,  fulminatoris  j^f^renteni.  He  also 
follows  the  explanation  of  the  Ten,  which  applies  it  to  the  ten 


248  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

ings,)^  sharp- visaged,  universally  renowned,  shining 
among  men.    Him  they  conduct  (to  every  dwelling). 

3.  They  contemplate  three  places  of  his  birth, — 
one  in  the  ocean,  one  in  the  heaven,  one  in  the 
firmament ;  and,  dividing  the  seasons  of  the  year, 
for  the  benefit  of  earthly  creatures,  he  formed,  in 
regular  succession,  the  eastern  quarter.^ 

4.  Which  of  you  discerns  the  hidden'  Agni  ? 
A  son,  he  begets  his  mothers  by  oblations.''  The 
germ  of  many  (waters),  he  issues  from  the  ocean,^ 
mighty  and  wise,  the  recipient  of  oblations. 


fingers,  which  generate  Agni  through  the  air  of  attrition,  as  an 
embryo  in  the  sticks.     Sd?jana  gives  both  interpretations. 

*  Vihhritram,  deposited  in  all  creatures ;  that  is,  in  the 
capacity  of  the  digestive  faculty,  which  is  referred  to  the  action 
of  natural  heat. 

*  As  submarine  fire,  Agni  is  born  in  the  ocean;  as  the  sun, 
in  heaven ;  and,  as  lightning,  in  the  firmament.  In  his  character 
of  the  sun,  he  may  be  said  to  be  the  distributor  of  time  and 
space, — regulating  the  seasons,  and  indicating  the  points  of  the 
horizon. 

"  Latent  heat ;  the  natural  heat  extant  in  the  wa,ters,  in  the 
woods,  and  in  all  fixed  and  moveable  things,  although  not  per- 
ceptible to  sense. 

^  Agni,  in  the  form  of  lightning,  may  be  considered  as  the 
son  of  the  waters  collected  in  the  clouds ;  and  those  waters  he 
is  said  to  generate  by  the  oblations  which  he  conveys :  as,  in  the 
Smriti,  it  is  said, — "  Oblations  ofFeicd  in  fire  ascend  to  the  sun : 
rain  is  produced  from  the  sun ;  corn,  from  rain  ;  and  thence  spring 
mankind." 

®  Agni  is  thought  to  rise,  in  the  morning,  in  the  shape  of  the 
sun  from  out  of  the  ocean, — upasthdt  samudrdt  *  *  nirgachchhati. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA SEVENTH   ADHYAYA,  249 

5.  Appearing  amongst  them  (the  waters),  the 
bright- shining  (Agni)  increases,  rising  above  the 
flanks  of  the  waving  waters,^  spreading  his  own 
renown.  Both  (heaven  and  earth)  are  alarmed,  as 
the  radiant  Agxi  is  born ;  and,  approaching  the 
lion,^  they  pay  him  honour. 

6.  Both  the  auspicious   ones'  (day  and  night,)    varga  n. 
wait   upon   him,    like   two   female   attendants ;    as 
lowing  kine  (follow  their  calves),  by  the  paths  (that 

they  have  gone).  He  has  been  the  lord  of  might 
among  the  mighty,  whom  (the  priests),  on  the  right 
(of  the  altar),  anoint. 

7.  Like  the  sun,  he  stretches  forth  his  arms ;  and 
the  formidable  Agni,  decorating  both  heaven  and 
earth  (with  brightness),  labours  (in  his  duties).  He 
draws  up,  from  everything,  the  essential  (moisture), 
and  clothes  (the  earth)  with  new  vestments,  (de- 
rived) from  his  maternal  (rains). 

8.  Associated,  in  the  firmament,  with  the  moving 
waters,  he  assumes  an  excellent  and  lustrous  form ; 
and  the  wise  sustainer  (of  all  things)  sweeps  over 

*  Above,  on  the  side,  or  tip,  of  the  crooked  waters, — dsu 
jihmdndm  *  *  upasthe.  Agni,  here,  is  the  lightning,  which  appears 
on  the  skirts  of  the  unevenly-disposed,  or  undulating,  rain  falling 
from  the  clouds. 

''  Sinham  the  Scholiast  considers  as  applicable  to  Agni,  to 
imply  his  ability  to  suffer  or  be  overcome, — sahanasilam,  ahhi- 
hhavanasilam.  There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  objection  to  the 
metaphorical  use  of  the  literal  meaning  of  the  word,  'a  lion.' 

•^  Both  may,  also,  intimate  heaven  and  earth ;  or  the  two  pieces 
of  wood  rubbed  together  to  produce  flame. 


250  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

the  source''  (of  the  rains,  with  his  radiance),  whence 
a  concentration  of  light  is  spread  abroad  by  the 
sportive  deity. 

9.  The  vast  and  victorious  radiance  of  thee,  the 
mighty  one,  pervades  the  firmament.  Agni,  who 
hast  been  kindled  by  us,  preserve  us  with  all  thy 
undiminished  and  protecting  glories. 

10.  He  causes  the  waters  to  flow,  in  a  torrent, 
through  the  sky;  and,  with  those  pure  waves,  he 
inundates  the  earth.  He  gathers  all  (articles  of)  food 
in  the  stomach,  and,  for  that  purpose,  sojourns  in 
the  new-sprung  parents^  (of  the  grain). 

11.  Agni,  who  art  the  purifier,  growing  with 
the  fuel  we  have  supplied,  blaze,  for  the  sake  of 
(securing)  food  to  us  who  are  possessed  of  wealth ; 
and  may  Mitea,  Yaruna,  Aditi,  ocean,  earth,  and 
heaven,  preserve  it  to  us. 


SUKTA  III.  (XCVI.) 

The   Rishi  and  metre  are   as   before;  the   deity  is  Agni,    but 
either  in  his  general  character,  or  as  Dravinodd. 

Vargaiii.        1.   Engendered   by   force,    Agni,    verily,    appro- 
priates, as  soon  as  born,  the  offerings  of  the  sages : 


^  Budhna  is  the  term,  in  this  and  in  the  next  verse,  for  the 
antarihsha,  or  firmament,  as  the  root,  or  source,  of  the  rains. 

^  The  text  has  merely  navdsu  *  prasushu, — in  the  new  parents, 
or  mothers ;  that  is,  in  the  oshadhis,  the  annuals,  or  the  cerealia, 
which  ripen  after  the  rains,  and  bear  food,  being  impregnated 
by  the  terrestrial  Agni. 


FIRST   -ASHTAKA SEVENTH   ABHYAYA.  251 

the  waters  and  voice  make  him  their  friend  ;  ^  and  the 
gods  retain  him,  as  the  giver  of  (sacrificial)  wealth.^ 

2.  (Propitiated)  by  the  primitive  laudatory  hymn 
of  Ayu,  he  created  the  progeny  of  the  Maxus,'' 
and  pervades,  with  his  all-investing  splendour,  the 
heavens  and  the  firmament.  The  gods  retain  Agni, 
as  the  giver  of  (sacrificial)  wealth. 

3.  Approaching  him,  let  all  men  adore  Agni, 
the  chief  "^  (of  the  gods),  the  accomplisher  of  sacri- 
fices, who  is  gratified  by  oblations,  and  propitiated 
by  praises,  the  offspring  of  food,  the  sustainer  of 
(all  men),  the  giver  of  continual  gifts.  The  gods 
retain  Agni,  as  the  giver  of  (sacrificial)  wealth. 

4.  May  Agni,  the  dweller  in  the  firmament,  the 
nourisher  with  abundant  benefits,  the  bestower  of 
Stvarga,  the  protector  of  mankind,  the  progenitor  of 
heaven  and  earth,  instruct  my  sons  in  the  right 
way.  The  gods  retain  Agni,  as  the  giver  of  (sacri- 
ficial) wealth. 

^  The  Agni  alluded  to  is  the  ethereal  or  electric  fire,  combined, 
at  its  production,  with  rain  and  with  sound. 

''  As  the  conveyer  of  oblations,  the  term  is  dravitiodd,  the 
giver  of  wealth ;  but  the  wealth  is  that  of  sacrifice,  or  abundance 
of  clarified  butter, 

•^  A'l/u  is  said,  by  the  Scholiast,  to  be  another  name  of  Manu. 
What  is  intended  by  the  progeny  of  the  Ilamis  is  not  very  obvious  ; 
but  it  appears  to  intend  simply  mankind.  The  Scholiast  says, 
being  hymned  by  Ifanu,  he  created  all  the  offspring  of  Ifanu 
{Manund  stutah  san  mdnav'ih  sarvdh  prajd  ajanayat). 

^  The  term  is  prathama, — the  first,  which  the  Commentator 
interprets  by  mukhya,  chief. 


252  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

5.  The  night  and  the  day,  mutually  effacing  each 
other's  complexion,  give  nourishment,  combined 
together,  to  one  infant,''  who,  radiant,  shines  between 
earth  and  heaven.  The  gods  retain  Agni,  as  the 
giver  of  sacrificial  wealth. 
arga  .  g^  rjij^^  sourcc  of  opulencc,  the  bestower  of  riches, 
the  director  of  the  sacrifice,  the  accomplisher  of  the 
desires  (of  the  man)  who  has  recourse  to  him, — 
him  the  gods,  preserving  their  immortality,  retain, 
as  the  giver  of  (sacrificial)  wealth. 

7.  The  gods  retain  Agni, — as  the  giver  of  (sacri- 
ficial) wealth, — who  now  is,  and  heretofore  has  been, 
the  abode  of  riches,  the  receptacle  of  all  that  has 
been,  and  all  that  will  be,  born,  and  the  preserver 
of  all  (that)  exists,  (as  well  as  of  all)  that  are  coming 
into  existence. 

8.  May  Deavinoda  grant  us  (a  portion)  of  move- 
able wealth ;  may  Deavinoda  grant  us  (a  portion) 
of  that  which  is  stationary ;  may  Deavinoda  give 
us  food,  attended  by  progeny ;  may  Deavinoda 
bestow  upon  us  long  life. 

9.  Thus,  Agni,  who  art  the  purifier,  growing 
with  the  fuel  (we  have  supplied),  blaze,  for  the  sake 
of  securing  food  to  us  who  are  possessed  of  wealth ; 
and  may  Mitea,  Vaeuna,  Aditi,  ocean,  earth, 
heaven,  preserve  it  to  us. 


"■  Agni,  whom  they  nourish  with  the  oblations  offered  during 
their  continuance. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA SEVENTH    ADHTAYA.  253 


Si5kta  IV.  (XCVII.) 

The  Rishi  is  the  same ;  the  deity,  Agni,  as  pure  fire,  or  that  of 
which  purity  is  the  attribute ;  the  metre  is  Gdyatr'i. 

1.  May  our  sin,  Agni,  be  repented  of.^    Manifest     Varga  v. 
riches  to  ns.     May  our  sin  be  repented  of. 

2.  We  worship  thee,  for  pleasant  fields,  for  good 
roads,  and  for  riches.     May  our  sin  be  repented  of. 

3.  (In  like  manner  as,  among  these  thy  worship- 
pers, Xutsa)  is  the  pre-eminent  panegyrist,  so  are 
our  encomiasts  (of  thee)  the  most  distinguished. 
May  our  sin  be  repented  of. 

4.  Inasmuch  as  thy  worshippers  (are  blessed  with 
descendants),  so  may  we  (by  repeating  thy  praise,) 
obtain  posterity."     May  our  sin  be  repented  of. 

6.  Since  the  victorious  flames  of  Agni  penetrate 
universally,  may  our  sin  be  repented  of. 


^  Apa  nah  sosuchad  agham.  S'osuchat  is  from  such,  to  sorrow, 
in  the  intensative  form,  and  the  Vaidik  imperative,  or  let,  with 
apa  prefixed,  although  locally  detached.  The  commentator 
proposes  two  interpretations;  "Let  our  sin  pass  away  from  us, 
and  light  upon  our  adversaries;"  or,  "Let  our  sin,  afi'ected  by 
grief,  perish."     Rosen  renders  it,  nostrum  expietur  scelus. 

^  Pra  *  *  jdycmalii  *  *  vayani ;  from  jan,  to  be  born  : — May 
we  be  born  successively,  in  the  persons  of  our  posterity.  Rosen 
has  vincamus  tito  auxilio  ;  but  this  is,  evidently,  an  oversight,  from 
confounding  the  radical  \f^iih  ji—Jaye,  conquering.  M.  Langlois 
follows  his  rendering,  with  some  additions  : — 0  Agni!  si  ces  chefs 
de  famille,  si  nous-memes  nous  nous  avangons  avec  respect,  puissions- 
nous  obtenir  la  victoire  ! 


264  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

6.  Thou,  whose  countenance  is  turned  to  all  sides, 
art  our  defender.     May  our  sin  be  repented  of. 

7.  Do  thou,  whose  countenance  is  turned  to  all 
sides,  send  off  our  adversaries,  as  if  in  a  ship,  (to 
the  opposite  shore).    May  our  sin  be  repented  of. 

8.  Do  thou  convey  us,  in  a  ship,  across  the  sea, 
for  our  welfare.     May  our  sin  be  repented  of. 

SiJkta  y.  (XCVIII.) 

The  Rishi,  as  before ;   the  deity  is  either  Vaiswanaea,  or  the 
pure  {suddha)  Agni  ;  the  metre  is  Trishtulh. 

VargaVi.  \  j^^y  WO  coutiuue  in  the  favour  of  Yaiswa- 
NAEA  ; ""  for,  verily,  he  is  the  august  sovereign  of  all 
beings.  As  soon  as  generated  from  this  (wood),  he 
surveys  the  universe ;  he  accompanies  the  rising 
sun." 

2.  Agni,  who  is  present"  in  the  sky,  and  present 
upon  earth,  and  who,  present,  has  pervaded  all 
herbs, — may  the  Agni  Yaiswanaea,  who  is  present 

^  Vaiswdnara  implies  either  he  who  rules  over  all  (viswa)  men 
(nara),  or  who  conducts  them  (nara)  to  another  region, — either 
to  heaven,  through  oblations,  or,  possibly,  to  future  life,  through 
the  funeral  fire. 

''  Either  as  the  combined  heat  with  solar  radiance ;  or,  it  is 
said,  that,  at  the  rising  of  the  sun,  in  proportion  as  the  solar  rays 
descend  to  earth,  so  the  rays  of  the  terrestrial  fire  ascend,  and 
mix  with  them. 

"  Prisht'a,  explained  by  sansprisht'a,  in  contact  with,  or  nihita, 
placed,  or  present,  in  the  sky.  Apii  is  in  contact  with,  or  present 
in,  the  sun  ;  on  earth,  in  sacred  and  domestic  fire  ;  and,  in  herbs, 
or  annuals,  as  the  cause  of  their  coming  to  maturity. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SEVENTH   ADHTATA.  255 

in  vigour,  guard   us,  night   and  day,   against  our 
enemies. 

3.  Yaiswanara,  may  this  (thy  adoration  be 
attended)  by  real  (fruit) :  may  precious  treasures 
wait  upon  us :  ^  and  may  Mitra,  Vaeuna,  Aditi, 
ocean,  earth,  and  heaven,  preserve  them  to  us. 

St5kta  VI.  (XCIX.) 
The  RisM  is  Kasyapa,  the  son  of  Maeichi  ;  and  the  Hymn, 
consisting  of  a  single  stanza,  in  the  Trisht'uhh  metre,  is  addressed 
to  Agiji,  as  Jatavedas." 

1.  We   offer   oblations   of    Soma  to   Jatavedas.  "^arga  vii. 
May    he   consume   the   wealth  of  those   who   feel 
enmity  against  us  :  may  he  transport   us  over  all 
difficulties.    May  Agni  convey  us,  as  in  a  boat  over 
a  river,  across  all  wickedness. 

SlJKTA  VII.  (C.) 
The  deity  is  Indea  ;  the  Rishis  are  the  Varshagieas, — or  five  sons 
of  Veishagie,"  a  Rdjd, — who  were  RdjarsJds,  or  regal  sages,  seve- 
rally named  in  the  seventeenth  stanza ;  the  metre  is  TrisMulh. 

1.  May  he,  who  is  the  showerer  of  desires  ;  who  Varga  viii. 

*  Eosen  has  divitice  nos  opulentos  sequuntor  ;  but  the  maghavdnah 
of  the  text  cannot  be  the  accusative  plural,  which  would  be  either 
maghavatah  or  maghonah.  It  is  the  adjective  of  the  word  imme- 
diately preceding,  rdtjah,  '  riches,'  here  said  to  mean  wealth  in 
family,  or  sons,  grandsons,  &c. 

''  There  is  nothing  remarkable  in  this  Sukta,  except  its  brevity, 
it  consisting  of  a  single  stanza. 

"  We  have  no  mention  of  VrisMgir  and  his  sons  in  the 
Purdiias. 


256  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

is  co-dweller  with  (all)  energies,  the  supreme  ruler 
over  the  vast  heaven  and  earth,  the  sender  of  water, 
and  to  be  invoked  in  battles  ; — may  Indra,  asso- 
ciated with  the  Maruts,  be  our  protection. 

2.  May  he,  whose  course,  like  that  of  the  sun, 
is  not  to  be  overtaken  ;  who,  in  every  battle,  is  the 
slayer  of  his  foes,  the  witherer  (of  opponents) ;  who, 
with  his  swift-moving  friends,  (the  winds),  is  the 
most  bountiful  (of  givers) ; — may  Indra,  associated 
with  the  Maruts,  be  our  protection. 

3.  May  he,  whose  rays,  powerful  and  unattain- 
able, issue  forth,  like  those  of  the  sun,  milking  (the 
clouds) ;  he,  who  is  victorious  over  his  adversaries, 
triumphant  by  his  manly  energies ; — may  Indra, 
associated  with  the  Maruts,  be  our  protection. 

4.  He  is  the  swiftest  among  the  swift, ^  most 
bountiful  amongst  the  bountiful,  a  friend  with 
friends,  venerable  among  those  who  claim  venera- 
tion, and  preeminent  among  those  deserving  of 
praise.  May  Indra,  associated  with  the  Maruts,  be 
our  protection. 

5.  Mighty  with  the  Eudras,  as  if  with  his  sons ; 
victorious  in  battle  over  his  enemies  ;  and  sending 
down,  with  his  co-dwellers,  (the  waters,  which  are 
productive  of)  food, — Indra,  associated  with  the 
Maruts,  be  our  protection. 


^  Angirohhir  angirastamaJi^  "  the  most  Angiras  of  Angirasas," 
which  might  be  thought  to  refer  to  the  Rishis  so  named  :  but 
the  Commentator  derives  it  from  ang,  to  go,  and  explains  angi- 
rasah  by  gantdrah,  goers;    '  those  who  go  swiftly.' 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SEVENTH  ADHYAYA.  257 

6.  May  he,  the  represser  of  (hostile)  wrath,  the    ^^s*  i^* 
author  of  war,  the  protector  of  the  good,  the  in- 
voked of  many,  share,  with  our  people,  on  this  day, 

the  (light  of  the)  sun."*    May  Indra,  associated  with 
the  Maruts,  be  our  protection. 

7.  Him  his  allies,  the  Maruts,  animate  in  battle ; 
him  men  regard  as  the  preserver  of  their  property : 
he  alone  presides  over  every  act  of  worship.  May 
Indra,  associated  with  the  Maruts,  be  our  protec- 
tion. 

8.  To  him,  a  leader  (to  victory),  his  worshippers 
apply,  in  contests  of  strength,  for  protection  and  for 
wealth ;  as  he  grants  them  the  light  (of  conquest), 
in  the  bewildering  darkness  (of  battle)."  May 
Indra,  associated  with  the  Maruts,  be  our  pro- 
tection. 

9.  With  his  left  hand  he  restrains  the  malignant ; 
with  his  right,  he  receives  the  (sacrificial)  offerings  : 
he  is  the  giver  of  riches,  (when  propitiated)  by  one 
who  celebrates  his  praise.  May  Indra,  associated 
with  the  Maruts,  be  our  protection. 

10.  He,   along  with  his  attendants,   is  a  bene- 

*  The  VdrsMgiras  are  supposed  to  address  tMs  prayer  to 
Ind/ra,  that  they  might  have  daylight,  in  which  to  attack  their 
enemies,  and  to  recover  the  cattle  that  had  heen  carried  away 
by  them,  or  that  the  light  may  be  withheld  from  their  op- 
ponents. 

"  The  expression  jyotish,  *  light,'  and  cMttamasi,  '  in  the  dark- 
ness of  thought,'  may,  also,  be  applied  more  literally,  and  express 
the  hope  that  Indra  will  give  the  light  of  knowledge  to  darkness 
of  understanding. 

21 


258  '  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

factor :  he  is  quickly  recognized  by  all  men,  to-day, 
^  through  his  chariots :  by  his  manly  energies  he  is 
victor  over  unruly  (adversaries).  May  Indea,  asso- 
ciated with  the  Maruts,  be  our  protection. 
Varga  X.  11.  Involvcd  by  many,  he  goes  to  battle,  with  his 
kinsmen,  or  with  (followers)  not  of  his  kindred: 
he  secures  the  (triumph)  of  those  who  trust  in  him, 
and  of  their  sons  and  grandsons.  May  Indra,  asso- 
ciated with  the  Maruts,  be  our  protection. 

12.  He  is  the  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  the 
slayer  of  robbers,  fearful  and  fierce,  knowing  many 
things,  much  eulogized,  and  mighty,  and,  like  the 
Soma  juice,  inspiring  the  five  classes  of  beings  with 
vigour.  May  Indra,  associated  with  the  Martjts, 
be  our  protection. 

13.  His  thunderbolt  draws  cries  (from  his  ene- 
mies) ;  he  is  the  sender  of  good  waters,  brilliant  as 
(the  luminary)  of  heaven,  the  thunderer,  the  pro- 
moter of  beneficent  acts:  upon  him  do  donations 
and  riches  attend.  May  Indra,  associated  with  the 
Maruts,  be  our  protection. 

14.  May  he,  of  whom  the  excellent  measure  (of 
all  things),  through  strength,''  eternally  and  every- 
where cherishes  heaven  and  earth,  propitiated  by 
our  acts,  convey  us  beyond  (evil).  May  Indra, 
associated  with  the  Maruts,  be  our  protection. 

15.  Nor  gods,  nor  men,  nor  waters,  have  reached 

*  S'avasd  manam,  the  distributor  of  all  things,  through  his 
power.  Or  it  may  mean,  that  he  is  the  prototype  of  everything 
endued  with  vigour. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SEVENTH   ADHYAYA.  259 

the  limit  of  the  strength  of  that  beneficent  (divi- 
nity);^ for  he  surpasses  both  earth  and  heaven  by 
his  foe-consuming  (might).  May  Indra,  associated 
with  the  Maruts,  be  our  protection. 

16.  The  red  and   black  coursers,— long-limbed,    VargaXi. 
well- caparisoned,  and  celestial,  and  harnessed,  well- 
pleased,  to  the  yoke  of   the   chariot  in  which  the 
showerer  of  benefits  is  conveyed,  for  the  enrichment 

of  Rijraswa, — are  recognized  amongst  human  hosts." 

17.  Indra,  showerer  (of  benefits),  the  Yarsha- 
GiRAs, — Rijraswa,  and  his  companions,  Ambarisha, 
Sahadeva,  Bhayamana,  and  Suradhas, — address 
to  thee  this  propitiatory  praise. 

18.  Indra,  who  is  invoked  by  many,  attended 
by  the  moving  (Maruts),  having  attacked  the 
Dasyus  and  the  S'imyus^''  slew  them  with  his 
thunderbolt :  the  thunderer  then  divided  the  fields 
with  his  white-complexioned  friends,'^  and  rescued 
the  sun,  and  set  free  the  water. 

^  The  text  has  na  yasya  devd  devatd.  The  latter  is  said  to 
be  put  for  devasya,  a  Vaidik  license,  and  is  explained,  "endowed 
with  the  properties  of  giving,  &c."  :  {ddnddigunayuktasya). 

^  NdhusMshu  vilcshu.  Nahuslia  is  explained  by  '  man ;'  whence 
the  derivative  wiU  mean  manly,  or  human :  vis  also  imports 
*  man ;'  whence  Rosen  renders  the  phrase,  inter  humanas  gentes. 
The  Scholiast  interprets  vikshu  by  sendlakshandsuprajdsu, 
"people  designated  as  an  army." 

"  The  commentary  explains  these,  *  enemies'  and  Bdkshasas ; 
but  they,  more  probably,  designate  races  not  yet  subjected  by 
the  Vaidik  Hindus,  or  Arians. 

■*  Sakhihhih  switnyebhih.     These,  according  to  the  Scholiast, 


260  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

19.  May  Indra  be,  daily,  our  vindicator ;  and  may 
we,  with  undiverted  course,  enjoy  (abundant)  food; 
and  may  Mitra,  Yaruna,  Aditi,  ocean,  earth,  and 
heaven,  preserve  it  to  us. 


SiJkta  VIII.  (CI.) 

The  Rishi  is  Kutsa,  the  son  of  Angtkas  ;  the  deity,  Indra  :  the 
metre  of  the  first  seven  stanzas  is  Jagat'i;  of  the  last  four, 
TrisMuhh. 
Varga  xiT.       1.  Offer  adoratiou,  with  oblations,  to  him  who 
is  delighted  (with  praise) ;  who,  with  Rijiswan,  de- 
stroyed the  pregnant  wives  of  Krishna.''     Desirous 
of  protection,   we   invoke,   to   become   our   friend, 
him,  who  is  the  shower er  (of  benefits),  who  holds 
the  thunderbolt  in  his  right  hand,  attended  by  the 
Maruts. 

2.  "We  invoke,  to  be  our  friend,  Indra,  who  is 
attended  by  the  Maruts  ;  him  who,  with  increasing 
wrath,  slew  the  mutilated  Vritra,  and  S'ambara, 

are  the  winds,  or  Maruts ;  but  why  they  should  have  a  share  of 
the  enemy's  country,  {satrunum  hhumim),  seems  doubtful.  Allu- 
sion is,  more  probably,  intended  to  earthly  friends,  or  worshippers, 
of  Indra,  who  were  white  {switnya)  in  comparison  with  the 
darker  tribes  of  the  conquered  country. 

*  Rijiswan  is  said  to  be  a  king,  the  friend  of  Indra :  Krishna^ 
to  be  an  Asura,  who  was  slain,  together  with  his  wives,  that 
none  of  his  posterity  might  survive.  [See  Vol.  II.,  p.  35, 
note  b,  and  Vol.  III.,  p.  148,  note  7.]  Krishna,  the  Hack,  may 
be  another  name  for  Vritra,  the  black  cloud ;  or  we  may  have, 
here,  another  allusion  to  the  dark-complexioned  aborigines. 


FIRST   ASIITAKA — SEVENTH   ADHYAYA.  261 

and  the  unrighteous  Pipru,^  and  who  extirpated  the 
unabsorbable  S'ushna.'' 

3.  We  invoke,  to  become  our  friend,  Indra,  who 
is  attended  by  the  Maruts  ;  whose  great  power 
(pervades)  heaven  and  earth  ;  in  whose  service 
Varuna  and  Surya  are  steadfast ;  and  whose  com- 
mand the  rivers  obey. 

4.  Who  is  the  lord  over  all  horses  and  cattle ;  who 
is  independent ;  who,  proj)itiated  by  praise,  is  con- 
stant in  every  act;  and  who  is  the  slayer  of  the 
obstinate  abstainer  from  libations :  we  invoke,  to 
become  our  friend,  Indra,  attended  by  the  Maruts. 

5.  Who  is  the  lord  of  all  moving  and  breathing 
creatures ;  who,  first,  recovered  the  (stolen)  kine,  for 
the  Brahman  ; "  and  who  slew  the  humbled  Dasyus : 
we  invoke,  to  become  our  friend,  Indra,  attended 
by  the  Maruts. 

6.  Who  is  to  be  invoked  by  the  brave  and  by 
the  timid,  by  the  vanquished  and  by  victors,  and 
whom  all  beings  place  before  them,  (in  their  rites)  : 

*  S'amhara  and  Pipru  are,  both,  termed  Asuras.  The  latter  is 
also  styled  avrata,  not  performing,  or  opposing,  vratas,  or 
religious  rites. 

''  S'mMam  asusham,  the  dryer  up ;  who  is  without  being 
dried  up,  who  cannot  be  absorbed. 

"  Brahnane,  that  is,  for  Angiras,  or  the  Angirasas,  who, 
according  to  the  Scholiast,  were  of  the  Brahmanical  caste. 
Several  passages  concur  in  stating  the  cows  to  have  been  stolen 
from  the  Angirasas ;  and  Angiras  cannot  be  identified  with 
Brahma.  The  term  used,  therefore,  very  probably  denotes  a 
Brahman :  so  Rosen  has  Brahmani  *  vaccas  tribuif. 


262  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

we  invoke,  to  become  our  friend,  Indra,  attended 
by  the  Martits. 
Varga  XIII.  7.  The  radiant  Indra  proceeds  (along  the  jfirma- 
ment),  with  the  manifestation  of  the  Eudras  :* 
through  the  Eudras,  speech  spreads  with  more 
expansive  celerity,  and  praise  glorifies  the  renowned 
Indra:  him,  attended  by  the  Maruts,  we  invoke, 
to  become  our  friend. 

8.  Attended  by  the  winds,  giver  of  true  wealth, 
whether  thou  may  est  be  pleased  (to  dwell)  in  a 
stately  mansion,  or  in  a  lowly  dwelling,  come  to  our 
sacrifice.  Desirous  of  thy  presence,  we  offer  thee 
oblations. 

9.  Desirous  of  thee,  Indra,  who  art  possessed 
of  excellent  strength,  we  pour  forth,  to  thee,  liba- 
tions :  desirous  of  thee,  who  art  obtained  by  prayer, 
we  offer  thee  oblations.  Therefore,  do  thou,  who 
art  possessed  of  horses,  sit  down,  with  pleasure,  upon 
the  sacred  grass,  attended  by  the  Maruts,  at  this 
sacrifice. 

*  Ind/ra  is  here  said  to  be  radiant,  through  identity  with  the 
sun ;  and  the  Rudras,  to  be  the  same  as  the  Maruts,  in  their 
character  of  vital  airs,  or  prdndh :  as  it  is  said,  in  another  text, 
"When  shining,  he  rises,  having  taken  the  vital  airs  of  all 
creatures"  (Fo  hau  tapann  udeti  sa  sarveshdm  hJmtdndm prdridn 
dddyodeti).  Hence,  also,  the  subservience  of  the  Rudras  to  the 
expansion  of  voice,  or  speech.  Another  application  of  the  etymo- 
logical sense  of  Rudra  is  here  given  by  Sdyam  ;  he  deriving  it,  as 
elsewhere,  from  the  causal  of  rud,  to  weep.  When  the  vital 
airs  depart  from  the  body,  they  cause  the  kindred  of  the  deceased 
to  weep :  hence  they  are  called  Rudras. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA.— SEVENTH   ADHTAYA.  263 

10.  Eejoice,  Indra,  with  the  steeds  who  are  of 
thy  nature :  open  thy  jaws ;  set  wide  thy  throat,  (to 
drink  the  Soma  juice) :  let  thy  horses  bring  thee, 
who  hast  a  handsome  chin,  (hither) ;  and,  benignant 
towards  us,  be  pleased  by  our  oblations. 

11.  Protected  by  that  destroyer  (of  foes)  who 
is  united,  in  praise,  with  the  Maruts,  we  may  re- 
ceive sustenance  from  Indra:  and  may  Mitra, 
Yaruna,  Aditi,  ocean,  earth,  and  heaven,  preserve 
it  to  us. 


SiJkta  IX.  (CII.) 

The  Rishi  and  deity,  as  in  the  last :  the  metre  of  the  first  ten 
stanzas  is  Jagat'i ;  of  the  last,  TrisMuhh. 

1.  I  address  to  thee,  who  art  mighty,  this  ex-  VargaXiv. 
cellent  hymn ;  because  thy  understanding  has  been 
gratified  by  my  praise.     The  gods  have  successively 
delighted  that  victorious  Indra  with  the  power  (of 
praise),  for  the  sake  of  prosperity  and  wealth. 

2.  The  seven  rivers  display  his  glory :  heaven, 
and  earth,  and  sky  display  his  visible  form.  The  sun 
and  moon,  Indra,  perform  their  revolutions,  that 
we  may  see,  and  have  faith  in  what  we  see. 

3.  Maghavan,  despatch  thy  chariot,  to  bring  us 
wealth, — that  victorious  car  which,  Indra,  who  art 
much  praised,  by  us,  in  time  of  war,  we  rejoice  to 
behold  in  battle.  Do  thou,  Maghavan,  grant  happi- 
ness to  those  who  are  devoted  to  thee. 

4.  May  we,  having  thee  for  our  ally,  overcome 
our  adversaries  in  every  encounter.      Defend    our 


264  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

portion ;  render  riches  easily  attained  by  us ;  en- 
feeble, MaghavaNj  the  vigour  of  our  enemies. 

5.  Many  are  the  men  who  call  upon  thee  for  thy 
protection.  Mount  thy  car,  to  bring  wealth  to  us ; 
for  thy  mind,  Indra,  is  composed,  and  resolved  on 
victory, 
y  ^y  6.  Thy  arms  are  the  winners  of  cattle ;  thy  wis- 
dom is  unbounded ;  thou  art  most  excellent,  the 
grantor  of  a  hundred  aids  in  every  rite.  The  author 
of  war,  Indra  is  uncontrolled  ;  the  type  of  strength  : 
wherefore,  men  who  are  desirous  of  wealth  invoke 
him  in  various  ways. 

7.  The  food,  Maghavan,  (which  is  to  be  given, 
by  thee,)  to  men,  may  be  more  than  sufficient  for 
a  hundred,  or  for  more,  even,  than  a  thousand. 
Great  praise  has  glorified  thee,  who  art  without 
limit,  whereupon  thou  destroyest  thy  enemies. 

8.  Strong  as  a  twice-twisted  rope,  thou  art  the 
type  of  strength :  protector  of  men,  thou  art  more 
than  able  to  sustain  the  three  spheres,  the  three 
luminaries, ""  and  all  this  world  of  beings,  Indra, 
who  hast,  from  birth,  ever  been  without  a  rival. 

9.  We  invoke  thee,  Indra,  the  first  among  the 
gods.  Thou  hast  been  the  victor  in  battles.  May 
Indra  put  foremost,  in  the  battle,  this  our  chariot, 
which  is  efficient,  impetuous,  and  the  uprooter  (of 
all  impediments).^ 

'^  The  three  fires ;  or,  the  sun  in  heaven,  lightning  in  mid-air, 
and  fire  (sacred  or  domestic,)  on  earth. 

*"  Or  the  epithets  may  be  applied  to  putra,  a  son,  understood, 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SEVENTH   ADHYAYA.  265 

10.  Thou  conquerest,  and  withholdest  not  the 
booty.  In  trifling,  or  in  serious,  conflicts,  we  sharpen 
thee,  fierce  Maghavan,  for  our  defence.  Do  thou, 
therefore,  inspirit  us,  in  our  defiances. 

11.  May  Indra  daily  be  our  vindicator  ;  and  may 
we,  with  undiverted  course,  enjoy  abundant  food : 
and  may  Mitra,  Yaruna,  Aditi,  ocean,  earth,  and 
heaven,  preserve  it  to  us. 


SiJkxa  X.  (CIII.) 
The  Rishi  and  deity,  as  before  ;  the  metre,  Trisht'uhh. 

1.  The   sages   have   formerly  been  possessed  of  VargaXVi. 
this  thy  supreme  power,  Indra,  as  if  it  were  present 

with  them,'' — one  light  of  whom  shines  upon  the 
earth  ;  the  other,  in  heaven  :  and  both  are  in  com- 
bination with  each  other ;  ^  as  banner  (mingles  with 
banner, )  in  battle. 

2.  He  upholds,  and  has  spread  out,  the  earth. 
Having  struck  (the  clouds),  he  has  extricated  the 

— may  Indra  give  us  (a  son),  an  offerer  of  praises,  all-wise,  and 
the  subduer  of  foes,  and  (give  us),  also,  a  chariot  foremost  in 
battle. 

*  The  term  is  pardchaih,  which  is  rather  equivocal.  Rosen 
renders  the  phrase, — tuo  rohore  *  contra  ipsorum  inimicos  directo ; 
but  it,  rather,  means  the  contrary, — inverse,  averted  {pardchma, 
pardnmukha).  But  the  other  sense  proposed  by  the  Scholiast 
seems  preferable. — abhimnkham  eva,  as  if  present. 

"  The  sun  and  fire  are  equally,  it  is  said,  the  lustre  of  Indra. 
In  the  day,  fire  is  combined  {samprichyate)  with  the  sun ;  in 
the  night,  the  sun  is  combined  with  fire. 


266  EIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

waters.  He  has  slain  Ahi  ;  he  has  pierced  Eauhina  ; 
he  has  destroyed,  by  his  prowess,  the  mutilated 
(Vritra).'' 

3.  Armed  with  the  thunderbolt,  and  confident 
in  his  strength,  he  has  gone  on  destroying  the 
cities  of  the  Dasz/us.  Thunderer,  acknowledging 
(the  praises  of  thy  worshipper),  cast,  for  his  sake, 
thy  shaft  against  the  Das?/u,  and  augment  the 
strength  and  glory  of  the  Arya^ 

4.  Maghavan,  possessing  a  name"  that  is  to  be 
glorified,  offers,  to  him  who  celebrates  it,  these  (re- 
volving) ages  of  man.''  The  thunderer,  the  scatterer 
(of  his  foes),  sallying  forth,  to  destroy  the  Dasyus^ 
has  obtained  a  name  (renowned  for  victorious) 
prowess. 

*  Ahi  and  Vritra  have,  on  former  occasions,  been  considered 
as  synonyms :  here  they  are  distinct,  but  mean,  most  probably, 
only  differently  formed  clouds,  Eauhina,  termed  an  Asura,  is,  in 
all  likelihood,  something  of  the  same  sort, — a  purple,  or  red,  cloud. 

^  "We  have,  here,  the  Dasyu  and  Arya  placed  in  opposition ; 
the  one,  as  the  worshipper,  the  other,  as  the  enemy  of  the 
worshipper.  Ddsih,  as  the  adjective  to purah,  cities,  is  explained 
*  of,  or  belonging  to,  the  Dasi/us.^  The  mention  of  cities  indicates 
a  people  not  wholly  barbarous,  although  the  term  may  designate 
villages  or  hamlets. 

°  Nama  lihhrat.  The  Scholiast  interprets  ndma,  strength, 
"that  which  is  the  bender  or  prostrator  of  foes  ;"  from  nam,  to 
bow  down.  But  it  does  not  seem  necessary  to  adopt  any  other 
than  the  usual  sense. 

*  Mdnushemd  yugdni,  '  these  mortal  yugas ' ;  the  Krita,  Tretd, 
Sfc,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  which  Indra  successively  evolves, 
in  the  character  of  the  sun. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SEVENTH   ADHYAYA.  267 

5.  Behold  this,  the  vast  and  extensive  (might  of 
Indea):  have  confidence  in  his  prowess.  He  has 
recovered  the  cattle;  he  has  recovered  the  horses, 
the  plants,  the  waters,  the  woods. 

6.  We  ofi'er  the  Soma  libation  to  him  who  is  the  ^^^s^  ^^^i- 
performer  of  many  exploits,  the  best  (of  the  gods),  the 
showerer  (of  benefits),  the  possessor  of  true  strength, 

the  hero  who,  holding  respect  for  wealth,  takes  it 
from  him  who  performs  no  sacrifice, — like  a  foot-pad 
(from  a  traveller), — and  proceeds  (to  give  it)  to  the 
sacrificer. 

7.  Thou  didst  perform,  Indea,  a  glorious  deed, 
when  thou  didst  awaken  the  sleeping  Ahi  with  thy 
thunderbolt.  Then  the  wives  (of  the  gods),  the 
Maetjts,  and  all  the  gods,  imitated  thy  exultation. 

8.  Inasmuch,  Indea,  as  thou  hast  slain  S'ushna, 
PiPEU,  Kuyava,  and  Vritea,  and  destroyed  the 
cities  of  S'ambaea,  therefore  may  Mitea,  Yaeuna, 
Aditi,  ocean,  earth,  and  heaven,  grant  us  that 
(which  we  desire). 

St5e:ta  XI.  (CIV.) 
The  Rishi,  deity,  and  metre,  as  before. 

1.  The    altar   has   been    raised,  Indea,  for  thy  Vargaxviii. 
seat:  hasten  to  sit  upon  it, — as  a  neighing  horse 
(hastens  to  his  stable), — slackening  the  reins,  and 
letting  thy  coursers   free,    who,  at   the   season    of 
sacrifice,  "^  bear  thee,  night  and  day. 

*  We  have  only  *  for  the  season  of  sacrifice,'  prapitwe, — for 
prdpte,—\iiexd]].j, '  arrived  ;'  synonymous,  in  the  NmcUa,  III.,  20, 


268  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

2.  These  persons  have  come  to  Indra,  (to  solicit) 
his  protection.  May  he  quickly  direct  them  on  the 
way.  May  the  gods  repress  the  wrath  of  the  de- 
stroyer, and  bring  to  our  solemnity  the  ob viator  of 
evil. 

3.  (The  Asura)^^  knowing  the  wealth  of  others, 
carries  it  off,  of  himself.  Present  in  the  water,  he 
carries  off,  of  himself,  the  foam.  The  two  wives  of 
KuYAVA  bathe  with  the  water:  may  they  be 
drowned  in  the  depths  of  the  S'ipha  river. 

4.  The  abiding-place  of  the  vagrant"  (Kuyava) 
was  concealed  (in  the  midst)  of  the  water.  The  hero 
increases,  with  the  waters  formerly  (carried  off),  and 
is  renowned  (throughout  the  world).  The  Anjasi, 
KuLisi,  and  Virapatni''  rivers,  pleasing  him  with 
their  substance,  sustain  him  with  their  waters. 

5.  Since  the  track  that  leads  to  the  dwelling  of 
the  Dasyu^  has  been  seen  by  us, — as  a  cow  knows  the 
way  to  her  stall, — therefore  do  thou,  Maghavan, 
(defend  us)  from  his  repeated  violence  :  do  not  thou 
cast  us  away,  as  a  libertine  throws  away  wealth. 

with  adverbs  signifying  proximity, — near,  nigh,  at  hand.  The 
Scholiast  supplies  ydgahdle  prdpte,  the  time  of  sacrifice  being 
arrived. 

*  Presently  named  Kuyava.  His  exploits  are  obscurely  alluded 
to ;  and  the  river  S'ipha  is  not  elsewhere  found. 

"  Aya  is  said,  by  the  Scholiast,  to  be  an  appellative  of  Kuyava  ; 
from  ay,  to  go, — one  going  about  to  do  mischief  to  others. 

•=  Neither  of  these  is  found  in  the  Paurdnik  lists. 

**  Of  Kuyava,  according  to  the  commentary ;  intending,  pos- 
sibly, by  him,  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  barbarians. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SEVENTH  ADHYAYA.  269 

6.  Excite,  in  us,  Indea,  veneration  for  the  sun,  VargaXix. 
for  the  waters,  and  for  those  who  are  worthy  of  the 

praise  of  living  beings,  as  exempt  from  sin.  Injure 
not  our  offspring,  while  yet  in  the  womb ;  for  our 
trust  is  in  thy  mighty  power. 

7.  Hence,  Indra,  I  meditate  on  thee :  on  this 
(thy  power)  has  our  trust  been  placed.  Showerer 
(of  benefits),  direct  us  to  great  wealth :  consign  us 
not,  thou  who  art  invoked  by  many,  to  a  destitute 
dwelling :  give,  Indra,  food  and  drink  to  the 
hungry. 

8.  Harm  us  not,  Indra  ;  abandon  us  not ;  deprive 
us  not  of  the  enjoyments  that  are  dear  to  us.  In- 
jure not,  affluent  S'akra,  our  unborn  offspring ; 
harm  not  those  who  are  capable  (only  of  crawling) 
on  their  knees. 

9.  Come  into  our  presence.  They  have  called 
thee,  fond  of  the  Soma  juice :  it  is  prepared :  drink 
of  it,  for  thine  exhilaration.  Vast  of  limb,  distend 
thy  stomach  ;  and,  when  invoked,  hear  us,  as  a  father 
(listens  to  the  words  of  his  sons). 

StfKTA  XII.  (CY.) 

The  Hymn  is  addressed  to  the  Viswadetas,  by  Tmta,  or  by 
KuTSA,  on  his  behalf;  the  metre  is  Pankti,  except  in  the 
eighth  verse,  where  it  is  Mahdhrihat'i  Yavamadhyd,  and  in  the 
last,  where  it  is  Trisht'uhh. 

1.  The  graceful-moving  moon  ^  speeds  along  the   Varga  xx. 

*  Chandramdh  *  *  supariiah.  The  latter  the  Scholiast  explains, 
sohhanapatana,  the  well,  or  elegantly,  going.     Or  it  may  mean. 


270  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

middle  region  in  the  sky :  bright  golden  rays  (my 
eyes,)  behold  not  your  abiding-place."*  Heaven  and 
earth,  be  conscious  of  this  (my  affliction).^ 

2.  Those  who  seek  for  wealth  obtain  it :  a  wife 
enjoys  (the  presence  of)  her  husband,  and,  from 
their  union,  progeny  is  engendered.  Heaven  and 
earth,  be  conscious  of  this  (my  affliction). 

3.  Never,  gods,  may  this  (my  ancestry),  abiding 
above,  in  heaven,  be  excluded  (from  it);*"  never 
may  we  be  in  want  (of  a  son),  the  cause  of  joy  (to 
his  progenitors),  entitled  to  libations  of  the  Soma 
juice.  Heaven  and  earth,  be  conscious  of  this  (my 
affliction). 

"  connected  with  the  ray  of  the  sun  called  &uparna^^  the  combi- 
nation with  which  gives  the  moon  its  light. 

^  This  refers  to  the  supposed  position  of  Trita,  at  the  bottom 
of  the  well,  which,  being  covered  over,  shuts  out  from  him  all 
visible  objects :  see  the  story  of  Trita,  Hymn  lii.,  note  a,  p.  141. 

^  The  text  has  only  "heaven  and  earth,  know  of  this  of  me" 
{vittam  me  asya  rodas'i) ;  that  is,  according  to  Suyaria,  either 
"  be  aware  of  this  my  affliction,"  or  "  attend  to  this  my  hymn." 

*  By  failure  of  posterity,  such  as  TnYa  anticipates  for  himself; 
as  by  a  text  quoted:  "By  a  son,  a  man  conquers  the  worlds: 
there  is  no  world  {loha)  for  one  who  has  no  son."  It  may  be 
observed,  of  this  reference,  that,  although  the  Scholiast  cites  the 
Veda, — iti  sruteh, — the  passage  occurs  in  fhe  Aitarey a  Brdhmaiia. 
It  may,  possibly,  be  found  in  the  text  of  a  hymn  ;  but  it  is,  also, 
possible  that  Sdyana  includes  the  Bruhmana  under  the  designation 
Sruti;  in  which  case  we  must  receive  his  citations,  generally,  with 
reserve  ;  for  the  Brdhnana  is  not  the  S'ruti,  as  applicable  to  the 
original  Vaidik  text,  although  it  is  so  regarded  by  aU  the  native 
interpreters  of  the  Vedas.     (See  Introduction,  pp.  ix.,  &c.) 


FIRST  ASHTAKA — SEVENTH   ADHYAYA.  271 

4.  I  implore  the  first  (of  the  gods),^  the  object 
of  sacrifice,  that  he  will  become  my  messenger,  and 
narrate  (my  condition  to  the  other  deities).  Where, 
Agni,  is  thy  former  benevolence  ?  What  new  being 
now  possesses  it  ?  Heaven  and  earth,  be  conscious 
of  this  (my  affliction). 

5.  Gods,  who  are  present  in  the  three  worlds,  who 
abide  in  the  light  of  the  sun,  where,  now,  is  your 
truth  ?  Where,  your  untruth  ?  Where,  the  ancient 
invocation  (that  I  have  addressed)  to  you  ?  Heaven 
and  earth,  be  conscious  of  (my  affliction). 

6.  Where,    deities,    is  your   observance   of   the    Varga  xxi. 
truth  ?    Where,  the  (benignant)  regard  of  Varuna  ? 

Where  is  the  path  of  the  mighty  Aryaman,"  (so 
that)  we  may  overcome  the  malevolent  ?  Heaven 
and  earth,  be  conscious  of  this  (my  affliction). 

7.  I  am  he,  Gods,  who  formerly  recited  (your 
praise),  when  the  libation  was  poured  out.  Yet 
sorrows  assail  me,  like  a  wolf  (that  falls  upon)  a 
thirsty  deer.  Heaven  and  earth,  be  conscious  of 
this  (my  affliction). 

8.  The  ribs  (of  the  well  close)  round  me,  like 
the  rival  wives  (of  one  husband) :  cares  consume 
me,  S'atakratu, — although  thy  worshipper, — as  a  rat 

*  According  to  the  {Aitareya)  Brdhmana,  Agnir  vai  devdndm 
avamah  ;  whicli  the  Scholiast  explains,  the  first-produced  of  all  the 
gods  ;  as,  by  another  text,  Agnir  muhham  prathamo  devatdndm, — 
Agni  is  the  mouth,  the  first,  of  the  deities. 

''  Varuna  is  here  explained  to  mean  the  *  obstructor  of  evil,'  as 
what  is  undesired  {anisManivdraka) ;  Argaman,  the  restrainer  of 
enemies  {armdm  niyantd). 


272  RIG- VEDA  SANHITA. 

(gnaws  a  weaver's)  threads.^     Heaven  and  earth, 
be  conscious  of  this  (my  affliction). 

9.  Those  which  are  the  seven  rays  (of  the  sun), 
in  them  is  my  navel  expanded.^  Trita,  the  son  of 
the  waters,"  knows  that  (it  is  so) ;  and  he  praises 
them  for  his  extrication  (from  the  well).  Heaven 
and  earth,  be  conscious  of  this  (my  affliction). 

10.  May   the   five  shedders"*  (of  benefits),  who 


*  Which,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  have  been  steeped  in  rice- 
water,  to  render  them  more  tenacious,  and  which  are,  therefore, 
palatable  to  rats.  Or  it  may  be  rendered,  "  as  a  rat  gnaws,  or 
licks,  its  tail,  having  j ust  dipped  it  in  oil,  or  grease."  The  practice 
of  thickening  threads  with  starch  we  have  noticed  by  Manu, 
where  the  law  requires  that  the  cloth  returned  shall  be  heavier 
than  the  thread  given,  on  this  account  (viii.,  397). 

"  It  is  not  very  clear  what  is  intended  by  the  term  ndhhi. 
Eosen  renders  it  domicile  :  Hi  qui  septem  soils  radii  sunt,  inter  illos 
meum  domicilium  collocatum  est.  But  it  is  not  so  explained  in 
the  commentary ;  and  the  ordinary  sense  of  7idh1d  is  navel,  in 
which  the  Scholiast  seems  to  understand  it;  identifying  the 
solar  rays  with  the  seven  vital  airs  abiding  in  the  ruling  spirit 
{teshu  siiryarasmishwadhydtmam  saptaprdiiarupena  vartamdneshu) ; 
alluding,  perhaps,  though  obscurely,  to  the  mystic  practice  of 
contemplating  the  umbilical  region,  as  the  seat  of  the  soul. 

°  Aptya,  explained  apdm  putraJi,  son  of  the  waters.  But  it 
may  be  doubted  if  it  can  properly  bear  such  an  interpretation ; 
for,  as  admitted  by  the  Scholiast,  such  a  patronymic  from  apa 
would  be,  properly,  dpya ;  and  the  insertion  of  the  t  is  an  anomaly. 

^  They  are  said  to  be  Indra,  Varum,  Agni,  Aryaman,  and 
Saviiri,  or,  according  to  other  texts,  Fire,  Wind,  the  Sun,  the 
Moon,  and  the  Lightning  :  for  these,  according  to  the  Sdt'ydyana 
Brdhmana,  are,  all,  luminous,  in  their  respective  spheres ;  or,  fire, 


FIRST    ASHTAKA SEVENTH    ADHYAYA.  273 

abide  in  the  centre  of  the  expanded  heavens,  having 
together  conveyed  my  prayers  quickly  to  the  gods, 
(speedily)  return.  Heaven  and  earth,  be  conscious 
of  this  (my  affliction). 

11.  The  rays  of  the  sun  abide  in  the  surrounding  VargaXXll. 
centre  of  heaven :  they  drive  back  the  wolf,  crossing 

the  great  waters,  from  the  path.'^  Heaven  and  earth 
be  conscious  of  this  (my  affliction). 

12.  That  new  praiseworthy  and  commended 
(vigour)^  is  seated  in  you,  ye  gods,  (by  which)  the 
rivers  urge  on  the  waters,  and  the  sun  diffuses  his 
constant  (light).  Heaven  and  earth,  be  conscious  of 
this  (my  affliction). 

13.  Worthy  of  praise,  Agni,  is  that  thy  relation- 
ship (with  the  gods).  Do  thou,  who  art  most  wise, 
seated  at  our  (solemnity),  worship  (the  gods),  as  (at 
the  sacrifice  of)  Manus. 

upon  earth,  wind,  in  the  firmament,  the  sun,  in  heaven,  the  moon, 
in  the  planetary  region,  and  lightning,  in  the  clouds.  The  Tait- 
tir'iyas  substitute,  for  lightning,  the  nakshatras^  or  asterisms, 
shining  in  the  Swarloha. 

"■  Alluding,  it  is  said,  to  a  story  of  a  wolf,  who  was  about  to 
swim  across  a  river,  to  devour  Trita,  but  was  deterred  by  the 
brightness  of  the  solar  rays.  According  to  YdsTca,  as  quoted  by 
Sdyaiia,  he  interprets  vriha,  the  moon,  and  apah,  the  firmament, 
and  renders  the  passage  :  "  The  rays  of  the  sun  prevent  the  moon 
from  appearing,  or  being  visible,  in  the  firmament." 

^  Bala,  '  strength,'  is  said,  by  the  Commentator,  to  be  understood, 
— of  which  ukthya,  praiseworthy,  is  an  epithet.  Eosen  takes 
ukthja  for  the  substantive,  in  its  not  unusual  sense  of  '  hymn,' 
and  translates  the  text :  Nova  h<zc  cantilena  dicata  est  vobis,  dii  ! 


22 


274  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

14.  May  that  wise  and  liberal  Agni,  a  sage 
amongst  the  gods,  seated  at  our  rite,  as  at  the  sacri- 
fice of  Manus,  be  the  invoker  of  the  deities,  and 
offer  them  oblations.  Heaven  and  earth,  be  con- 
scious of  this  (my  affliction). 

15.  Varuna  performs  the  rite  of  preservation." 
We  desire  him,  as  the  guide  of  our  way :  (to  him 
the  repeater  of  praise)  addresses  praise,  with  his 
(whole)  heart.  May  he,  who  is  entitled  to  laudation, 
become  our  true  (support).  Heaven  and  earth,  be 
conscious  of  this  (my  affliction). 

Varga  XXIII.  16.  The  suQ,  who  is,  avowedly,  made  the  path  in 
heaven,^  is  not  to  be  disregarded,  gods,  by  you )" 
but  you,  mortals,  regard  him  not.  Heaven  and 
earth,  be  conscious  of  this  (my  affliction). 

17.  Trita,  fallen  into  the  well,  invokes  the  gods, 
for  succour.  Brihaspati,  who  liberates  many  from 
sin,  heard  (the  supplication).  Heaven  and  earth, 
be  conscious  of  this  (my  affliction). 

18.  Once,  a  tawny  wolf  beheld  me  faring  on  my 

^  Brahma  hrinoti  Varunah.  The  first  is  here  explained,  rah- 
shanarupam  harma,  "the  act  which  is  of  the  nature  of  preserving." 

^  Asau  yah  panthdddityo  divi  pravdcliyamJcritah.  One  mean- 
ing of  panthdh  is  given  as  an  epithet  of  dditya,  the  sun,  as 
satatagdm'i,  the  ever-going :  but  the  more  usual  sense  is  a  road, 
a  path ;  and  this  interpretation  is  borne  out  by  texts  which 
represent  the  sun  as  the  road  to  heaven ;  as  Suryadwdrena  te 
mrajdh  praydnti, — Those  who  are  free  from  soU  go  by  the  gate  of 
the  sun. 

"  For  the  gods  depend,  for  existence,  indirectly  upon  the  sun, 
who  regulates  the  seasons  at  which  sacrifices  are  offered. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SEVENTH   ADHYATA.  275 

way,  and,  having  seen  me,  rushed  upon  me, 
(rearing) ;  as  a  carpenter  *"  whose  back  aches  (with 
stooping  stands  erect  from  his  work). 

19.  By  this  recitation  may  we,  becoming  pos- 
sessed of  Indra,  and  strong  with  multiplied  progeny, 
overcome  our  foes  in  battle  ;  and  may  Mitra, 
Varuna,  Aditi,  ocean,  earth,  and  heaven,  be 
gracious  to  us,  in  this  (request). 


ANUVAKA  XVI. 

SUKTA    I.    (CVI.) 

The  Rislii  is  Kutsa,  or  it  may  be  Teita  :  the  Hymn  is  addressed 
to  the  ViswADEVAS :  the  metre  is  Jagat'i,  except  in  the  last 
verse,  in  which  it  is  Trishfuhh.  ' 

1.  "We  invoke,  for  our  preservation,  Indra,  Mitra,  Varga  xxiv. 
Varuna,   Agni,   the    might  of  the   Maruts,   and 

Aditi.  May  they,  who  are  bountiful,  and  bestowers 
of  dwellings,  extricate  us  from  all  sin,  as  a  chariot 
from  a  defile. 

2.  Sons  of  Aditi,  come,  with  all  (your  hosts),  to 
battle.    Be,  to  us,  the  cause  of  happiness  in  combats ; 

^  The  meaning  of  the  comparison  is  not  very  clear,  and  is 
only  rendered  intelligible  by  the  additions  of  the  commentary. 
The  wolf,  like  the  carpenter,  was  urdhwdhhimiihha  (standing 
in  presence  erect).  The  passage  admits  of  a  totally  different 
rendering,  by  interpreting  vrika,  the  moon,  and  uniting  md  sahrit, 
me  once,  into  rndsahrit,  month-maker.  He,  the  moon,  it  is  said, 
having  contemplated  the  constellations  going  along  the  path  of 
the  sky,  became  united  with  one  of  them ;  paying,  therefore,  no 
attention  to  Trita  in  the  well. 


276  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

and  may  they,  who  are  bountiful,  and  bestowers  of 
dwellings,  extricate  us  from  all  sin,  as  a  chariot 
from  a  defile. 

3.  May  the  Piiris,"  who  are  easily  to  be  praised, 
protect  us  ;  and  may  the  two  divinities,  heaven  and 
earth,  the  promoters  of  sacrifices,  and  of  whom  the 
gods  are  the  progeny,  protect  us  ;  and  may  they, 
who  are  bountiful,  and  the  givers  of  dwellings,  ex- 
tricate us  from  sin,  as  a  chariot  from  a  defile. 

4.  Exciting  him  who  is  the  praised  of  men  and 
the  giver  of  food,  (to  be  present)  at  this  rite,  we 
solicit,  (also,)  with  our  praises,  him  who  is  the  puri- 
fier, and  destroyer  of  heroes.^  May  they,  who  are 
bountiful,  and  the  givers  of  food,  extricate  us  from 
sin,  as  a  chariot  from  a  defile. 

6.  Brihaspati,  always  confer  happiness  upon  us. 
We  solicit  that  faculty  of  both  (alleviating  pain  and 
obviating  peril),  implanted  in  thee  by  Manu.''  May 
they,  who  are  bountiful,  and  the  givers  of  dwell- 
ings, extricate  us  from  all  sins,  as  a  chariot  from  a 
defile. 

6.  KuTSA,*^  the  Ilishi,  thrown  into  a  well,  has 

"  The  Agnishwdttas  and  others. — See  Manu,  ni.,  195. 

^  In  the  first  clause,  it  is  said,  Agni  is  alluded  to ;  in  the 
second,  Pushan  is  named :  but  the  tei'm  is  explained,  by  the 
Scholiast,  poshaham  devam, — nutrientem  deum. 

"  S'am  yor  yat  te  Manur  Mtam, — the  good,  or  blessing,  of 
those  two  (things,  or  properties,)  which  was  placed  in  them  by 
Manu.  The  two  arc  explained,  in  the  commentary,  as  in  the 
translated  text. 

^  Kutsa  here  identifies  himself,  apparently,  with  Trita. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA SEVENTH    ADHYAYA.  277 

invoked,  to  his  succour,  Indra,  the  slayer  of  ene- 
mies, the  encourager  of  good  works. ""  May  they, 
who  are  bountiful,  and  the  givers  of  dwellings,  ex- 
tricate us  from  all  sin,  as  a  chariot  from  a  defile. 

7.  May  the  goddess  Aditi,  with  the  gods,  pro- 
tect us  ;  and  may  the  radiant  guardian,  (the  sun), 
be  vigilant  for  our  protection  ;  and  may  they,  who 
are  bountiful,  and  the  givers  of  dwellings,  extricate 
us  from  all  sin,  as  a  chariot  from  a  defile. 

SUKTA    II.    (CVII.) 

The  RisJii  is  Kutsa  ;  the  deities,  the  Viswadevas  ;  the  metre, 
Trisht'ubh. 

1.  May  our  sacrifice  give  satisfaction  to  the  gods.   Varga  xxv. 
Adityas,  be  gracious ;  and  may  your  good  intentions 

be  directed  towards  us,  so  as  to  be  an  abundant 
source  of  affluence  to  the  poor. 

2.  May  the  gods,  who  are  to  be  lauded  by  the 
hymns  of  the  Angirasas,  come  hither,  for  our  pro- 
tection :  may  Indra,  with  his  treasures  ;  the  Maruts, 
with  the  vital  airs  ;  and  Aditi,  with  the  Adityas  ; 
(come,  and)  give  us  felicity. 

3.  May  Indra,  may  Varuna,  may  Agni,  may 
Aryaman,  may  Savitri,  bestow  upon  us  that  food 
(which  we  solicit) ;  and  may  Mitra,  Yaruna,  Aditi, 
ocean,  earth,  and  heaven,  preserve  it  (to  us). 

""  S'achipati ;  which  might  be  rendered  '  the  husband  of 
S'achi.'  But  the  more  usual  sense  of  sach'i,  in  the  Veda,  is  karma, 
act,  or  rite ;  and  it  is  so  rendered,  in  this  place,  by  the  Commen- 
tator. 


278  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 


SUKTA    III.    (CVIII.) 

The  RisM  is,  still,  Kutsa,  who  addresses  Indea  and  Agni  ;  the 
metre  is  Trishtuhh. 

Varga  XXVI.  1.  Ikdra  and  Agni,  sitting  together,  in  your  car, 
— that  wonderful  car  which  illuminates  all  beings, 
— approach,  and  drink  of  the  effused  Soma  juice. 

2.  Vast  as  is  the  whole  universe  in  expanse,  and 
profound  in  depth,  such,  Indra  and  Agni,  may  this 
Soma  be,  for  your  beverage, — sufficient  for  your  de- 
sires. 

o.  You  have  made  your  associated  names  re- 
nowned, since,  slayers  of  Yritra,  you  have  been 
allied  (for  his  death).  The  showerers  of  benefits, 
Indra  and  Agni,  are  the  two  seated  together  (on 
the  altar).     Eeceive  (your  portion)  of  the  libation. 

4.  The  fires  being  kindled,  the  two  (priests  stand 
by),^  sprinkling  the  clarified  butter  from  the  ladles, 
— which  they  raise, — and  spreading  the  sacred  grass 
(upon  the  altar).  Therefore,  Indra  and  Agni,  come 
before  us,  for  our  gratification,  (attracted)  by  stimu- 
lating Soma  juices  sprinkled  all  around. 

5.  Whatever  heroic  exploits  you  have  achieved, 
whatever  forms  (you  have  created),  whatever  bene-" 
fits  (you  have  poured  down),  whatever  ancient  and 
fortunate  friendships  (you  have  contracted,  come, 
with  them  all),  and  drink  of  the  efi'used  Soma 
juice. 


*  Wc  have  merely,  in  the  text,  the  epithets  in  the  dual  number: 
the  Commentator  supplies  the  Adhwaryii  and  his  assistant  priest. 


FIRST  ASHTAKA — SEVENTH   ADHYAYA.  279 

6.  Come,   and  witness  the   sincere    faith    with  Vargaxxvii. 
which,  selecting  you  two,  I  first  promised  (you  the 
libation).  Drink  of  the  effused  libation ;  for  the  Soma  ' 
juice  is  prepared  by  the  priests. 

7.  If,  adorable  Indea  and  Agni,  you  have  ever 
been  delighted  (with  libations,)  in  your  own  dwell- 
ing, in  that  of  a  Brahman,  or  in  that  of  a  prince,'' 
then,  showerers  of  benefits,  come  hither,  from 
wherever  you  may  be,  and  drink  of  the  effused  li- 
bation. 

8.  If,  Indea  and  Agni,  you  are  amongst  men 
who  are  inoffensive,  malevolent,  or  tyrannical,  or 
those  who  live  (to  fulfil  the  duties  of  life),  or  those 
who    receive   the    fruits    (of  good   deeds),"    then, 


*  Tad  Brahnctni  Rdjani  vd.  The  first  is  explained,  a  Brahman 
who  is  a  different  institutor  of  a  sacrifice  {Brdhmane'nyasmin 
yajamdne) ;  the  second,  by  KsJiattriye,  a  man  of  the  second,  or 
military,  caste. 

"  The  terms  thus  rendered,  in  conformity  to  the  explanations 
of  the  Scholiast,  would  seem,  rather,  to  be  intended  for  proper 
names, — the  names  of  tribes  or  families  well  known  in  thePurdnas, 
— being,  severally,  Yadus,  Turvasas,  Bnihyus,  Amis  and  Purus, 
descendants  of  the  five  sons  of  Yaydti,  similarly  named.  {Mahdbh., 
I.,  138.)  Here,  however,  Yadu  is  explained  by  ahinsaha,  non- 
injurious;  Turvasa,  hyhinsaha,  injurious  ;  Druhyu,  by  upadrave- 
chchhu,  tyrannical ;  Arm,  by  prdnair  yuhtah,  having  breath,  or  life, 
wherewith  to  acquire  knowledge  and  perform  religious  acts; 
and  Puru,  by  Tcdmaih  purayitavyahf  to  be  filled  full  of  the  objects 
of  desire.  The  meanings  may  be  supported  by  the  etymology 
of  the  words;  but  the  interpretation  seems  to  be  a  needless 
refinement. 


280  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

showerers  of  benefits,  come  hither,  from  wherever 
you  may  be,  and  drink  of  the  efi'used  libation. 

9.  Whether,  Indra  and  Agni,  you  are  in  the 
lower,  the  central,  or  the  upper,  region  of  the  world, 
showerers  of  benefits,  come  hither,  from  wherever 
you  may  be,  and  drink  of  the  efi'used  libation. 

10.  Whether,  Indea  and  Agni,  you  are  in  the 
upper,  central,  or  lower,  region  of  the  world,  come, 
showerers  of  benefits,  hither,  from  wherever  you 
may  be,  and  drink  of  the  effused  libation. 

11.  Whether,  Indra  and  Agni,  you  are  in  heaven, 
or  upon  earth,  in  the  mountains,  in  the  herbs,  or  in 
the  waters,  showerers  of  benefits,  come  hither,  from 
wherever  you  may  be,  and  drink  of  the  effused 
libation. 

12.  Although,  Indra  and  Agni,  in  the  midst  of 
the  sky,  on  the  rising  of  the  sun,  you  may  be  ex- 
hilarated by  your  own  splendour,  yet,  showerers 
of  benefits,  come  hither,  from  wherever  you  may  be, 
and  drink  of  the  effused  libation. 

13.  Thus,  Indra  and  Agni,  drinking  deep  of  the 
libation,  grant  to  us  all  (kinds  of)  wealth :  and  may 
MiTRA,  Varuna,  and  Aditi,  ocean,  earth,  and 
heaven,  preserve  it  to  us. 


SUKTA    IV.    (CIX.) 

Rishi,  deities,  and  metre,  as  in  the  last. 

Varga  J.  Indra  and  Agni,  desirous  of  wealth,  I  con- 

XXVIII. 

sider  you,  in  my  mind,  as  kinsmen  and  relations. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SEVENTH   ADHYAYA.  281 

The  clear  understanding  you  have  given  me  (is 
given)  by  no  one  else ;  and,  (so  gifted),  I  have  com- 
posed this  hymn  to  you,  intimating  my  wish  for 
sustenance. 

2.  I  have  heard,  Indra  and  Agni,  that  you  are 
more  munificent  givers  than  an  unworthy  bride- 
groom,^ or  the  brother  of  a  bride."     Therefore,  as 


*  Vijdmdtri.  The  prefix  vnndicates,  according  to  the  Scholiast, 
a  son-in-law  {jdmdtri)  who  is  not  possessed  of  the  qualifications 
required  by  the  Vedas,  and  who  is,  therefore,  obliged  to  conciliate 
his  father-in-law  by  liberal  gifts  ;  which  is,  in  fact,  paying  for, 
or  buying,  his  wife ;  as  in  the  interpretation  of  this  stanza,  by 
Ydska,  it  is  said  {Niruhta,  VI.,  9),  that  the  vijdmdtri  is  the 
asusamdpta,  the  unfulfilled,  or  unaccomplished,  bridegroom, 
which  implies,  according  to  some,  that  he  is  the  husband  of  a 
purchased  bride  {kritdpati).  This  recognition,  in  the  Veda,  of 
the  act  of  receiving  money  from  the  bridegroom  is  at  variance 
with  the  general  tenour  of  the  law  of  marriage,  as  laid  down  by 
Manu,  which  condemns  the  acceptance  of  anything,  by  the  father 
of  a  maiden,  beyond  a  complimentary  present,  and  censures  the 
receipt  of  money,  as  equivalent  to  a  sale:  "Let  no  father  who 
knows  the  law  receive  a  gratuity,  however  small,  for  giving  his 
daughter  in  marriage ;  since  the  man  who,  through  avarice,  takes 
a  gratuity  for  that  purpose  is  a  seller  of  his  off'spring."  [Laws  of 
Manu,  III.,  51.)  And,  again  :  "  A  bribe,  whether  large  or  small, 
is  an  actual  sale  of  the  daughter ; "  although  a  bull  and  cow  might 
be  given  at  a  marriage  of  saintly  persons  or  Rishis.  {Ibid.,  53.) 
We  have,  here,  therefore,  an  indication  of  a  different  condition 
of  the  laws  of  marriage. 

^  The  stjdla,  the  brother  of  the  maiden,  who  makes  her  gifts 
through  affection.  The  word  is  derived,  by  Ydsha,  from  sya,  a 
winnowing-basket,  and  Id,  for  Idjd,  fried  grains,  which  are  scat- 
tered, at  the  marriage  ceremony,  by  the  bride's  brother. 


282  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

I  offer  you  a  libation,  I  address  you,  Indra  and 
Agni,  with  a  new  hymn. 

3.  Never  may  we  cut  off  the  long  line  (of  pos- 
terity). Thus  soliciting  and  asking  for  descendants 
endowed  with  the  vigour  of  their  progenitors,  the 
(worshippers),  begetting  children,  praise  Indra  and 
Agni,  for  their  happiness  ;  and  they  two,  destroyers 
of  foes,  are  nigh,  (to  hear  this  adoration). 

4.  The  sacred  prayer,  "*  desiring  your  presence, 
offers  to  you  both,  Indra  and  Agni,  for  your  ex- 
hilaration, the  Soma  libation.  Do  you  two,  who 
have  horses,  handsome  arms,  and  graceful  hands, 
come  quickly,  and  mix  (the  libation)  with  sweetness 
in  the  waters. 

5.  I  have  heard,  (when  you  were  present)  at  the 
division  of  the  treasure  (among  the  worshippers), 
that  you  two,  Indra  and  Agni,  were  most  vigorous 
in-  the  destruction  of  Yritra.  Beholders  of  all 
things,  seated  at  this  sacrifice,  upon  the  sacred  grass, 
be  exhilarated,  (by  drinking  of  the  effused  libation). 

Vargaxxix.  6.  Attending  to  the  summons,  at  the  time  of 
battle,  you  surpass  all  men  (in  magnitude):  you 
are  vaster  than  the  earth,  than  the  sky,  than  the 
rivers,  than  the  mountains : '  you  exceed  all  other 
existent  things. 

7.  Bring  wealth,  thunderers,  and  give  it  to  us : 
protect  us,  Indra  and  Agni,  by  your  deeds.  May 
those  rays  of  the  sun,^  by  which  our  forefathers 

'^  Devi  dhishatid,  dhine  speech, — mantrarupd,  in  the  form  of 
prayer. 

^  By  the  rays  of  the  sun,  in  this  place,  it  is  said,  are  intended 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SEVENTH   ADHYAYA.  283 

have  attained,  together,"  a  heavenly  region,  shine 
also  upon  us. 

8.  Indra  and  Agni,  wielders  of  the  thunderbolt, 
overtumers  of  cities,  grant  us  wealth ;  defend  us  in 
battles:  and  may  Mitra,  Yaruna,  Aditi,  ocean, 
earth,  and  heaven,  be  propitious  to  this  (our 
prayer). 


SUKTA    V.    (CX.) 

This  Hjmm  is  addressed  to  the  Ribiius  :  the  Rishi  is  Ktjtsa  :  the 
eighth  and  ninth  stanzas  are  in  the  TrisMubh ;  the  rest,  in  the 
Jagati  metre. 

1.  RiBHUS,  the  rite  fonnerly  celebrated  by  me   yaro-axxx. 
is  again  repeated ;  and  the  melodious  hymn  is  recited 

in  your  praise.  In  this  ceremony,  the  Soma  juice  is 
sufficient  for  all  the  gods.  Drink  of  it,  to  your  ut- 
most content,  when  offered  on  the  fire. 

2.  When,  Ribhus,  you,  who  were  amongst  my  an- 
cestors, yet  immature  (in  wisdom),  but  desirous  of 
enjoying  (the  Soma  libations),  retired  to  the  forest, 
to  perform  (penance),  then,   sons  of  Sudhanwan," 

the  radiance  of  Indra  and  Agni,  as  identical  with  the  sun.  By 
praising  the  latter,  therefore,  Indra  and  Agyii  are  praised  also. 

*  Sapitwam  is  explained,  sahaprdptavyam  sthdnam,  a  place 
to  be  obtained  together ;  that  is,  according  to  the  Commentator, 
the  world  of  Brahma,  to  which  the  pious  proceed  by  the  path  of 
light,  &c. — (archirudimdrgena  *  Brahmaloham  upusaku  gaehchhanfi). 

^  Sudhantoan,  the  father  of  the  Rihhus,  was  a  descendant  of  Angi- 
ras ;  so  is  Kiitsa  :  therefore,  they  are  related ;  although,  as  Kutsa 
is  the  son  of  Angiras,  it  seems  not  very  consistent  to  call  them 


284  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

through  the  plenitude  of  your  completed  (devotions), 
you  came  to  the  (sacrificial)  hall  of  the  worshipper, 
Savitri. 

3.  Then  Savitri  bestowed  upon  you  immortality, 
when  you  came  to  him, — who  is  not  to  be  concealed," 
— and  represented  (your  desire)  to  partake  of  the 
libations ;  and  that  ladle  for  the  sacrificial  viands, 
which  the  Asura^  had  formed  single,  you  made 
fourfold. 

4.  Associated  with  the  priests,  and  quickly  per- 
forming the  holy  rites,  they,  being  yet  mortals, 
acquired  immortality ;  and  the  sons  of  Sudhanwan, 
the  RiBHUS,  brilliant  as  the  sun,  became  connected 
with  the  ceremonies  (appropriated  to  the  different 
seasons)  of  the  year. 

5.  Lauded  by  the  bystanders,  the  Ribhus,  with 
a  sharp  weapon,  meted  out  the  single  sacrificial 
ladle, — like  a  field  (measured  by  a  rod), — soliciting 
the  best  (libations),  and  desiring  (to  participate  of) 
sacrificial  food  amongst  the  gods. 

Vargaxxxi.      6.  To  the  leaders  (of  the  sacrifice),'  dwelling  in 

his  kinsmen  of  a  former  period  {prd7ichah,  ox purvahdlindh).  Eosen 
calls  them  sapientes :  but  this  is  an  evident  inadvertence;  as  the 
epithet  is  apdhdh,  unripe;  aparipakwajndndh,  immature  in  wisdom. 

*  In  the  preceding  verse,  Savitrt,  derived  from  su,  to  offer 
oblations,  might  mean  merely  the  presenter  of  oblations;  but 
here  we  have,  evidently,  the  sun  alluded  to. 

''  Twasht'ri ;  as  in  a  former  passage. — See  p.  48,  note  h. 

"  NrihJiyah,  i.e.,  yajnasya  netrihhyah ;  as  in  the  text  Ribhavohi 
yajnasya  netdrah, — "  The  Rihhus  arc  the  leaders  of  the  sacrifice ; " 
on  which  account  they  obtained  immortality.     Or  the  term  may 


FIRST   ASHTAKA SEVENTH   ADHTAYA.  285 

the  firmament,  we  present,  as  with  a  ladle,  the  ap- 
pointed clarified  butter,  and  praise,  with  knowledge, 
those  l^iBHUS,  who,  having  equalled  the  velocity  of 
the  protector  (of  the  universe, — the  sun),*  ascended 
to  the  region  of  heaven,  through  (the  offerings)  of 
(sacrificial)  food. 

7.  The  most  excellent  Ribhu  is,  in  strength,  our 
defender;  Ribhu,  through  gifts  of  food  and  of 
wealth,  is  our  asylum.  May  he  bestow  them  upon 
us,  gods,  through  your  protection.  May  we,  upon 
a  favourable  occasion,  overcome  the  hosts  of  those 
who  offer  no  libations. 

8.  RiBHUs,  you  covered  the  cow  with  a  hide,  and 
reunited  the  mother  with  the  calf : "  sons  of  Su- 
DHANWAN,  leaders  (of  sacrifice),  through  your  good 
works,  you  rendered  your  aged  parents  young.'' 

9.  Indra,  associated  with  the  Ribhus,  supply  us, 
in  the  distribution  of  viands,  with  food,*^  and  consent 
to   bestow   upon   us   wonderful   riches:    and  may 

be  connected  with  antarihshasya,  whicli  precedes,  in  the  text,  and 
may  mean,  as  Rosen  has  it,  to  the  chiefs  of  the  firmament  {aeris 
regibm). 

*  A  text  of  the  Veda  identifies  the  Rihhus  with  the  solar  rays 
{Adityarasmayd'pyrihliava  iichyante).  The  Rihhus  are,  indeed, 
said  to  be  the  rays  of  the  sun. 

^  A  story  is  related,  that  a  Risld,  whose  cow  had  died,  leaving 
a  calf,  prayed  to  the  Rihhus  for  assistance,  on  which  they  formed 
a  living  cow,  and  covered  it  with  the  skin  of  the  dead  one,  from 
which  the  calf  imagined  it  to  be  its  own  mother. 

«  See  p.  47. 

^  Vdjehhir  no  vdj'asdtdvaviSShi  may  be  also  rendered,  "protect 
us,  in  battle,  with  your  horses." 


286  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

MiTRA,  Varuna,    Aditi,  ocean,  earth,  and  heaven, 
preserve  them  for  us. 

Si5kta  VI.  (CXI,) 

The  Rishi  and  deities  are  the  same :  the  metre  of  the  fifth  verse 
is  Trisht'uhh  j  of  the  rest,  Jagati. 

^Sii.  1-  The  RiBHUs,  possessed  of  skill  in  their  work, 
constructed  (for  the  As  wins,)  a  well-built  car :  they 
framed  the  vigorous  horses  bearing  Indra;  they 
gave  youthful  existence  to  their  parents  ;  they  gave, 
to  the  calf,  its  accompanying  mother.'' 

2.  Prepare  fully,  for  our  sacrifice,  resplendent" 
sacrificial  food,  and,  for  our  rite,  and  for  our  strength, 
such  nutriment  as  may  be  the  cause  of  excellent 
progeny;  so  that  we  may  live  (surrounded)  by 
vigorous  descendants.  Such  wealth  do  you  confer 
upon  us,  for  our  benefit. 

3.  RiBHUS,  conductors  (of  sacrifice),  bestow  ample 
sustenance  upon  us,  upon  our  chariots,  upon  our 
horses.  Let  every  one  daily  acknowledge  our  vic- 
torious wealth ;  and  may  we  triumph,  in  battle,  over 
our  foes,  whether  strangers  or  kinsmen. 

4.  I  invoke  the  mighty''  Indra,  for  protection; 

°'  See  the  preceding  Hymn;  also,  Hymn  xx.,  p.  45. 

^  Ribhumat ;  explained,  having  much  light :  for,  according  to 
the  Niruhta  etymology,  rihhu  means  'much  light,'  from  uru 
much,  and  Ihd,  to  shine. 

"  Ribhuhhanam  Indram  might  be  '  Indra,  who  is  Ribhuhshan,^ 
of  which  Ribhuhshanam  is  the  accusative.  In  the  following  expres- 
sions, Ribhiin  and  vdjdn,  plural  accusatives,  we  are  to  understand, 


FIRST  ASIITAKA — SEVENTH   ADHYAYA.  287 

and  the  Ribhus,  V^jas,  and  Maeuts,  to  drink  the 
Soma  juice ;  also,  both  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  the 
AswiNS :  and  may  they  direct  us  to  opulence,  to 
holy  rites,  and  to  victory. 

5.  May  Ribhu  supply  us  with  wealth  for  war; 
may  Vaja,  victorious  in  battle,  protect  us ;  and  may 
MiTEA,  Varuna,  Aditi,  ocean,  earth,  and  heaven, 
be  propitious  to  this  (our  prayer). 


Si5kta  VII.  (CXII.) 

The  RisTii  is  Kutsa:  the  first  quarter-stanza  is  addressed  to 
the  Earth  and  Sky ;  the  second,  to  Agni  ;  the  rest  of  the  Hymn, 
to  the  AswiNS.  The  metre  of  the  twenty-fourth  and  twenty- 
fifth  stanzas  is  Trisht'ubh  ;  of  the  rest,  Jagat'i. 

1.  I  praise  Heaven  and  Earth,   for  preliminary    xxxfii. 
meditation,  (prior  to  the  coming  of  the  Aswins): 

I  praise  the  hot  and  bright- shining  Agni,  upon  their 
approach,  (as  preparatory)  to  their  worship.  With 
those  appliances  with  which  you  sound  the  conch- 
shell,  in  battle,  for  your  share  (in  the  booty), — with 
those  aids,""  Aswins,  come,  willingly,  hither. 

2.  Earnest  and  exclusive  adorers  stand,  Aswins, 
round  your  car,  (to  benefit)  by  your  bounty ;  as 
(disciples  listen)  to  the  words  (of  a  teacher),  for 

according  to  the  Commentator,  the  three  sons  of  Sudhanwan, — 
Rihhu,  Vihhu,  and  Vuja. 

*  Utibhih,  instr.  plur.  of  uti,  help,  aid,  assistance,  protection. 
It  is  rather  an  awkward  term  to  render  into  English  with  the 
sense  of  plurality,  although  not  without  precedent. 


288  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

instruction.  With  those  aids  with  which  you  defend 
the  pious  who  are  engaged  in  acts  of  worship,  come, 
AswiNS,  willingly,  hither. 

3.  By  the  vigour  infused  from  celestial  nectar, 
you  are  able,  leaders  (of  sacrifice),  to  rule  over  those 
beings  (who  people  the  three  worlds).  With  those 
aids  by  which  you  gave  (milk)  to  the  barren  cow,^ 
come,  AswiNS,  willingly,  hither. 

4.  With  those  aids  by  which  the  circumambient 
(wind),  endowed  with  the  vigour  of  his  son,^  the 
measurer  of  the  two  worlds  (of  heaven  and  earth),*" 
and  swiftest  of  the  swift,  beautifies  (all  things),  and 
by  which  (Kakshivat)  became  learned  in  the  three 
kinds  of  sacrifice  ;'^ — with  them  come.  As  wins,  will- 
ingly, hither. 

^  Alluding,  according  to  the  commentary,  to  the  cow  of  a 
Hishi  named  S'ayu,  to  which,  although  barren,  the  Asioim,  at 
his  entreaty,  gave  abundance  of  milk.  [See  p.  313;  also,  Vol. 
IV.,  passim.'] 

"  Agni  is  said  to  be  the  son  of  Vdyu;  as  by  the  text  Vdyor 
Agnih,  either  as  generated,  in  the  character  of  digestive  warmth, 
by  the  vital  airs,  or  as  having  been  excited  into  flame,  by  the 
wind,  at  the  time  of  creation, 

•^  Dwimutri  may  be  applied  to  the  wind,  in  conjunction  with 
Agni,  as  the  respective  occupants  of  the  earth  and  the  firmament ; 
the  former  being  the  region  of  Agni,  the  latter,  of  Vdgu.  Or  it 
may  be  rendered,  as  in  former  instances,  '  the  son  of  two  mothers ;' 
or  the  two  sticks  used  for  attrition,  and,  thence,  be  applicable  to 
Agni. 

^  Or  trimantu,  acquainted  with  the  pdkayajnas,  or  offerings 
of  food ;  the  haviryajnas,  or  oblations  of  clarified  butter ;  and  the 
somayajnas,  or  libations  of  Soma  juice.     In  this  sense,  trimantu 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SEVENTH   ADHTAYA.  289 

5.  With,  those  aids  by  which  you  raised  up,  from 
the  water,  Eebha,  who  had  been  cast,  bound,  (into 
a  well),  and  also  Yandana  (similarly  circumstanced), 
to  behold  the  sky ;  by  which  you  protected  Kanwa, 
when  longing  to  see  the  light ; " — with  them,  AswiNS, 
come,  willingly,  hither. 

6.  With  those  aids  by  which  you  rescued  An-     .Z^vtV 
TAKA,^  (when  cast)  into  a  deep  (pool),  and  about  to 

be  destroyed ;  by  which,  inflicting  no  distress,  you 
preserved  Bhujyu  ; '  and  by  which  you  relieved 
Earkandhu  and  Vayya;"^ — with  them,  As  wins, 
come,  willingly,  hither. 

is  synonymous,  apparently,  with  Kahshwat,  whose  name  is  sup- 
plied by  the  Scholiast. 

*  Rehha  and  Vandana  are  said  to  have  been  Rishis  who  were 
cast  into  wells  by  the  Asuras.  According  to  the  N'lti-manjar'i, 
they  brought  this  upon  themselves,  by  maintaining  a  friendly 
intercourse  with  the  Asuras.  Kanwa  is  said,  also,  to  have  been 
thrown,  by  them,  into  darkness.  In  these,  and  similar  instances 
subsequently  noticed,  we  may,  possibly,  have  allusions  to  the 
dangers  undergone,  by  some  of  the  first  teachers  of  Hinduism, 
among  the  people  whom  they  sought  to  civilize. 

^  Antaha  is  called  a  Rdjarshi,  whom  the  Asuras  threw  into  a 
pond,  or  a  well. 

*=  Of  Bhujyu,  the  son  of  the  Rdjd  Tugra,  we  shall  hear 
again,  rather  more  in  detail.  The  tradition  is  remarkable. 
Bhujyu  had  embarked  on  a  maritime  expedition  against  the 
enemies  of  his  father,  but  encountered  a  storm,  in  which  his 
vessel  was  lost ;  he  was  saved,  and  brought  back  to  his  father, 
by  the  intervention  of  the  Aiwins. 

^  These  are  said  to  be  Asuras  whom  the  Aiwins  extricated 
from  misfortunes :  but,  for  the  latter,  see  p.  149. 

23 


290  RIG-YEDA   SAKHITA. 

7.  With  those  aids  by  whicli  you  enriched 
S'ucHANTij''  and  gave  him  a  handsome  habitation, 
and  rendered  the  scorching  heat  pleasurable  to 
Atei;^  and  by  which  you  preserved  Peisnigu  and 
Pueukutsa;'' — with  them,  Aswins,  come,  willingly, 
hither. 

8.  Showerers  (of  benefits),  with  those  aids  by 
which  you  enabled  (the  lame)  Paeayeij  (to  walk), 
the  blind  (Rijeaswa)  to  see,  and  (the  cripple) 
S'eona  to  go ;  "^  and  by  which  you  set  free  the  quail,^ 
when  seized  (by  a  wolf)  ;— with  those  aids,  Aswins, 
come,  willingly,  hither. 

9.  "With  those  aids  by  which  you  caused  the 
sweet  stream  to  flow ;  by  which  you,  who  are  ex- 
empt from  decay,  gratified  Yasishtha  ;  and  by  which 

*  No  account  is  given  of  this  person. 

''  Ati'i,  the  patriarch,  was  thrown,  it  is  said,  by  the  Asuras, 
into  a  cave  with  a  hundred  doors,  at  all  of  which  "fires  of  chaff 
were  kindled :  they  were  extinguished,  with  cold  water,  by  the 
Aswins.  Or,  according  to  Ydslca,  Atri  is,  here,  a  name  of  ^^w?, — 
the  eater  {atri)  of  clarified  butter, — but  whose  appetite,  or  in- 
tensity, being  checked  by  the  heat  of  the  sun  in  the  hot  weather, 
was  renovated  by  the  rain  sent  down  by  the  Asioiiis. 

°  "We  have  no  particulars  of  these,  except  that  Prisnigu  is  so 
named  from  his  possessing  brindled  cows  {prisnayo  *  gdvo  yasya). 

'^  Pardvrij  is  called  a  Rishi ;  so  are  Rijrdswa  and  &rona.  The 
first  is  named  without  an  epithet,  in  the  text;  instead  of  the 
second  (see  p.  259),  we  have  prdndha,  the  totally  blind ;  and 
B'rona  is  not  called  a  cripple,  but  is  said  to  have  been  made  to 
walk.  The  Scholiast  supplies  the  details.  [But  see  Vol.  II., 
p.  242,  note  b.] 

®  Vartilcd  the  commentary  calls  a  bird  like  a  sparrow :  the 
ordinary  sense  is  '  quail.' 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SEYEXTH   ADHYAYA.  291 

you  protected  Kutsa,  S'rutarya,  and  Narya;^ — 
with  them,  AswiNS,  come,  willingly,  hither. 

10.  With  those  aids  by  which  you  enabled  the 
opulent  YisPALA,  when  she  was  unable  to  move,  to 
go  to  the  battle  rich  in  a  thousand  spoils ;  and  by 
which  you  protected  the  devout  Vasa,  the  son  of 
Aswa;^ — with  them,  As  wins,  come,  willingly,  hither. 

11.  With  those  aids  by  which,  beauteous  donors,  Varga  xxxv. 
the  cloud  (was  made  to)  shed  its  sweet  (water),  for 

the  sake  of  the  merchant  Dirghasravas,  the  son 
of  Usij;  and  by  which  you  protected  the  devout 
Kakshivat;' — with  them,  Aswins,  come,  willingly, 
hither. 

12.  With  those  aids  by  which  you  filled  the  (dry) 
river-bed  with  water;  by  which  you  drove  the 
chariot,  without  horses,  to  victory;  and  by  which 
Trisoka'^  recovered  his  (stolen)  cattle  ; — with  them, 
Aswins,  come,  willingly,  hither. 

"■  VasisMha  is  well  known;  but  in  what  manner  he  was 
assisted  by  the  Aswins  does  not  appear.  Of  the  three  others 
named  in  the  text,  it  is  only  said  that  they  were  Rishis. 

^  The  story  of  Vispald  is  subsequently  more  fully  alluded  to. 
She  was  the  wife  of  Khela,  the  son  of  Agastya.  Vasa  and  Aswa 
are  called  Rishis. 

"  Dirghasravas  was  the  son  of  Dirghaiamas,  and,  therefore,  a 
Rishi.  But,  in  a  time  of  famine,  he  followed  trade,  to  obtain  a 
livelihood  :  hence  he  is  termed  a  va/iilc,  a  merchant.  As  the  son 
of  Usij,  he  should  be  the  same  as  Kalcsh'ivat  (see  p.  42,  note  a) ; 
but  the  text  treats  them,  apparently,  as  distinct. 

^  Trisoha  is  called  a  Rishi,  the  son  of  Kaiiiva.  These  holy 
persons  were  much  exposed,  apparently,  to  cattle-stealing. 


292  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

13.  With  those  aids  by  which  you  encompassed 
the  sun,  when  afar  off,  (to  extricate  him  from 
eclipse);  by  which  you  defended  Mandhatri,  in 
(the  discharge  of)  his  sovereign  functions  ;^  and  by 
which  you  protected  the  sage  Bharadwaja  ;^ — with 
them,  AswiNS,  come,  willingly,  hither. 

14.  With  those  aids  by  which  you  defended  the 
mighty  and  hospitable  Divodasa,  (when,  having 
undertaken)  the  death  of  S'ambaea,  he  hid  himself 
in  the  water,  (through  fear  of  the  Asuras)',''  by 
which  you  protected  Trasadasyu,*^  in  war; — with 
them,  As  WINS,  come,  willingly,  hither. 

15.  With  those  aids  by  which  you  preserved 
Vamra,  praised  by  all  around  him,  when  drinking 
(the  dews  of  the  earth);  by  which  you  protected 
Kali,  when  he  had  taken  a  wife,  and  Prithi,  when 


^  Mandhdtri  is  called  a  Rislii ;  but  a  Rdjarshi,  a  royal  sage,  is 
intended ;  as  Mandhdtri  ia  a  celebrated  prince  of  the  solar  dynasty 
{Vishnu  Pur dtia,  p.  363).  His  regal  character  is,  also,  evident 
from  his  office  (JcshaitrapaUjeshu),  the  derivative  of  kshetrapati, 
the  lord,  either  of  fields  or  of  the  earth. 

"  Here  we  have,  also,  a  name  well  known  in  Pauranih  tradition. 
(  Vishnu  Purdiia,  p.  449,  and  note  15).  He  is  termed,  in  the  text, 
vipra,  usually  intending  a  Brahman,  but  here  explained,  medhdvin, 
wise. 

'^  Divodasa  is  a  king  well  known  in  the  Paurdnih  traditions 
(  Vishnu  Purdtia,  p.  407).  But  no  notice  there  occurs  of  his  war 
with  the  Asura  S'amhara,  whom  we  have  elsewhere  seen  destroyed 
by  Indra  (p.  148),  in  defence,  it  is  also  said  (p.  137),  of  this  prince, 
or,  as  he  is  there  named,  Atithigwa,  the  cherisher  of  guests 
{atithi),  which  is  here  employed  as  an  epithet. 

^  The  son  of  PuruJcutsa,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  concurring, 
in  this  respect,  with  the  Vishnu  Purdna,  p.  371.  [And  see 
Vol.  III.,  p.  205,  note  1,  also  p.  272  j  and  Vol.  IV.,  p.  63.] 


FIEST   ASHTAKA— SEVENTH   ADHTAYA.  293 

he  had  lost  his  horse;'' — with  them,  Aswins,  come, 
willingly,  hither. 

16.  With  those  aids,  leaders  (of  sacrifices),  which 
you  afforded  to  S'atu,  to  Atri,  and,  formerly,  to 
Manu,  anxious  (to  show  them)  the  way  to  (escape 
from  evil);  with  those  by  which  you  shot  arrows 
(upon  the  foes)  of  Syumarasmi  ',^ — with  them,  As- 
wiNS,  willingly  come  hither. 

17.  With  those  aids  by  which  Pathaevan'  shone 
with  strength  of  form  in  battle,  like  a  blazing  fire 
piled  up  (with  fuel) ;  by  which  you  defended  S'ar- 
TATA  in  war ; — with  them,  As  wins,  come,  willingly, 
hither. 

^  Vamra  is  called  a  JRishi,  the  son  of  Vikhanas.  The  text  calls 
him  vipipdna,  drinking  much  and  variously,  which  the  Scholiast 
explains,  drinking,  especially  earthly  moisture,  or  dew,  pdrthi- 
vam  rasam.  (See  p.  138.)  Of  Kali,  no  more  is  said  than  that  he 
was  a  liisM  ;   nor  of  Prithi,  than  that  he  was  a  Rdjarshi. 

^  The  second  and  third  names  have  occurred  before.  The  first 
is  called  a  Rishi.  The  text  has  only,  "  You  wished  them  to  go" 
[ffdtum  ishathtih) :  the  Scholiast  adds,  "out  of  evil  or  danger." 
Manu  is  here  called  a  Rdjarshi,  whom  the  Aswins  extricated  from 
want,  by  teaching  him  the  art  of  sowing  the  seeds  of  barley  and 
other  grains.     Syiimarahni  is  styled  a  Rishi. 

°  Paiharvan  is  merely  called  a  Rdjarshi.  S'ari/dtais,  probably, 
intended  for  S'arydti,  the  fourth  son  of  Vaivaswata  Ilamt  ( Vishnu 
Purdiia,  pp.  354,  358) ;  and  the  same  prince  is,  no  doubt,  meant, 
in  a  former  passage  (see  p.  139),  by  S'drydta,  which  may  be  an 
epithet  of  yfif/Mfl!,  sacrifice,  understood, — the  sacrifice  of  Sarydti, — 
rather  than  a  patronymic,  although  there  rendered  as  a  proper 
name,  upon  the  authority  of  Sdyaiia.  "  Of  the  race  of  Rhriyti" 
applies,  also,  to  Chyavana,  not  to  S'arydti.  [But  see  Vol.  III., 
p.  81.] 


Varga 
XXXVI. 


294  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

18.  Angiras,  (praise  the  As  wins).  Aswins,  with 
those  aids  by  which,  with  (gratified)  minds,  you 
delight  (in  praise),  and  thence  preceded  the  gods 
to  the  cavern,  to  recover  the  stolen  cattle ;""  by 
which  you  sustained  the  heroic  Manu  with  food;^ — 
with  them,  AswiNS,  come,  willingly,  hither. 

19.  With  those  aids  by  which  you  gave  a  wife  to 
ViMADA ;""  by  which  you  recovered  the  ruddy  kine ; 
by  which  you  conferred  excellent  wealth  upon  Su- 
d4s  jd — ^^f^  them,  Aswins,  come,  willingly,  hither. 

20.  With  those  aids  by  which  you  are  bestowers 
of  happiness  upon  the  donor  (of  oblations) ;  by  which 
you  have  protected  Bhujyu  and  Adhrigu  ;  and  by 
which  you  have  granted  delighting  and  nourishing 
(food)  to  Ritastubh;^ — with  them,  Aswins,  come, 
willingly,  hither. 

*  We  have  here  attributed  to  the  Aswins  a  similar  feat  as  that 
usually  ascribed  to  Indra. 

*•  By  making  him  aware,  according  to  the  commentary,  of  the 
grain  hidden  in  the  earth,  or  teaching  him,  in  fact,  agriculture. 

"  The  Aswins  were  the  means,  it  is  said,  of  obtaining  the 
daughter  of  Purumitra  as  a  wife  for  the  Rishi  Vimada, 

^  The  name  of  a  king,  the  son  oi  Pijavana  (p.  127).  [Also  see 
Vol.  III.,  p.  50,  note  2, — where  correct  "  PiyavancC^  \  and  Vol. 
IV.,  p.  62.]  Both  names  are  unknown  in  the  Purdnas, — although 
we  have  more  than  one  Siiddsa, — but  they  are  sprung  from  other 
princes.  ( Vishnu  Purdna,  pp.  380,  455.)  A  prince  named 
Paiyavana,  or  son  of  Piyavana,  is  noticed  by  Manu,  VIII.,  110. 

®  Bhijyu  has  been  named  before  (p.  289,  note  c).  Adhrigu  is 
called  a  sacrificer,  or  immolator,  along  with  Chdpa,  of  the  gods ; 
as  by  the  text :  Adhrigus  Chupas  cha  uhhau  devdndm  Samiidrau. 
Ritastuhh  is  called  a  Rishi.     [See  Vol.  IV.,  p.  264.] 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — SEVENTH   ADHYAYA.  295 

21.  With   those   aids    by   which   you   defended       ^^'■«* 

•^     .  XXXVII. 

Keisanu,  in  battle ;  ^  with  which  you  succoured  the 
horse  of  the  young  Purukutsa''  in  speed ;  and  by 
which  you  deliver  the  pleasant  honey  to  the  bees ; — 
with  them,  AswiNS,  come,  willingly,  hither. 

22.  With  those  aids  by  which  you  succoured  the 
worshipper  contending  in  war  for  cattle  ;  by  which 
you  assist  him  in  the  acquisition  of  houses  and 
wealth;  by  which  you  preserve  his  chariots  and 
horses ; — with  them.  As  wins,  come,  willingly,  hither. 

23.  With  those  aids  by  which  you,  who  are  wor- 
shipped in  many  rites,"  protected  Kutsa,  the  son  of 
Arjuna,  as  well  as  Turvitt,  Dabhiti,  Dhwasanti, 
and  Purushanti  ;^ — with  them,  Aswins,  come,  will- 
ingly, hither. 

24.  Aswins,  sanctify  our  words  with  works  : 
showerers  (of  benefits),  subduers  of  foes,  (invigorate) 


*  Krisdnu  is  enumerated,  by  the  Taittir'iyas,  amongst  a  class 
called  somapalas,  venders  or  providers, — apparently,  of  the  Soma 
plants ;  as  by  the  text :  HastasuJiastahrisdnavah,  te  vah  soma- 
krayandh.  The  term  occurs  also  amongst  the  synonyms  of 
Agni.     [Also  see  Vol.  III.,  p.  174.] 

^  PurulcuUa,  in  the  Purdnas,  is  the  son  of  Mdndhdtri,  and 
husband  of  iyarm^cM,  the  river  {Vishtiu  Purdna,  p.  371).  The 
text  has  only  "of  the  young:"  the  comment  supplies  Puruhitsa. 
[See  Vol.  III.,  p.  205,  note  1.] 

"  S'atahratu,  the  usual  epithet  of  Indra^  '  he  to  whom  many 
rites  are  addressed,'  or  '  by  whom  many  acts  are  performed,'  is 
here  applied  to  the  Astvins. 

^  Kutsa  and  Turv'iti  have  occurred  before,  although  the  affilia- 
tion of  the  former  is  new.  Of  the  other  names  no  account  is 
given,  except  that  Purushanti  is  that  of  a  Rishi. 


296  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

our  imderstanding,  (for  the  sacred  study).  We  in- 
voke you  both,  in  the  last  watch  of  the  night,*  for 
our  preservation.  Be  to  us  for  increase  in  the  pro- 
vision of  food. 

25.  Cherish  us,  As  wins,  always,  by  night  or  day, 
with  undiminished  blessings  :  and  may  Mitra, 
Varuna,  Aditi,  ocean,  earth,  and  heaven,  be 
favourable  to  this  (our  prayer). 


EIGHTH  ADHYAYA. 

ANUYAKA  XYI.  (continued). 
St5kta  VIII.  (CXIII.) 
The  Hymn  is  addressed  to  IJshas  (the  Dawn),  and,  in  the  second 
half  of  the  first  stanza,  also  to  Night.     The  Rishi  is  Kutsa  ; 
the  metre,  Trisht'uhJi. 

"Varga  I.  \^  This  most  excellent  luminary  of  all  luminaries 
has  arrived  :  the  wonderful  and  diffusive  manifester 
(of  all  things)  has  been  born.  In  like  manner  as 
night  is  the  offspring  of  the  sun,  so  she  becomes 
the  birth-place  of  the  dawn." 

^  Adyiitye,  '  in  the  absence  of  light ; '  that  is,  in  the  last  watch 
of  the  night,  or  that  preceding  the  dawn,  at  which  time,  accord- 
ing to  A§waldyana,  as  quoted  by  Sdyana,  the  Aswins  are  especially 
to  be  worshipped. 

''  That  is,  when  the  sun  sets,  the  night  comes  on ;  or  it  is 
generated  by  the  setting  of  the  sun,  and  may,  figuratiYcly,  be 
termed  his  offspring;  and,  in  like  manner,  as  the  precursor, 
night  may  be  termed  the  parent,  or  womb,  of  the  dawn. 


riEST   ASHTAKA — EIGHTH   ADHYAYA.  297 

2.  The  white-shining  dawn,  the  parent  of  the 
sun,^  has  arrived :  dark  night  has  sought  her  own 
abode.  Both  allied  to  the  same  (sun),  immortal, 
succeeding  to  each  other,  and  mutually  effacing  each 
other's  complexion,  they  traverse  the  heavens. 

3.  The  path  of  the  sisters  is  unending :  they 
travel  it  alternately,  guided  by  the  radiant  (sun). 
Combined  in  purpose,  though  of  different  forms, 
night  and  dawn,  giving  birth  (to  all  things),  obstruct 
not  each  other ;  neither  do  they  stand  still. 

4.  Brilliant  guide  of  the  speakers  of  truth,^  the 
many-tinted  dawn  is  recognized  by  us :  she  has 
opened  our  doors :  having  illuminated  the  world, 
she  has  made  our  riches  manifest.  Ushas  gives 
back  all  the  regions  (that  had  been  swallowed  up 
by  night). 

5.  The  opulent  (dawn)  arouses  to  exertion  the  Varga  ii. 
man  bowed  down  in  sleep, — one  man,  to  enjoy- 
ments ;  another,  to  devotion ;  another,  to  (the  acquire- 
ment of)  wealth.  She  has  enabled  those  who  were 
almost  sightless  to  see  distinctly.  The  expansive 
UsHAS  has  given  back  all  the  regions. 

6.  The  dawn  rouses  one  man,  to  acquire  wealth  ; 
another,  to  earn  food  ;  another,  to  achieve  greatness  ; 
another,  to  sacrifices ;  another,  to  his  own  (pursuits) ; 
another,  to  activity ;    and  lights  all  men  to  their 

^  A  like  conceit  to  that  of  the  preceding  verse :  the  dawn 
precedes,  and,  therefore,  figuratively  bears,  or  is  the  parent  of, 
the  sun. 

*  Upon  the  appearance  of  the  dawn,  the  animals  and  birds 
utter  their  true,  or  natural,  cries. 


298  RIG-YEDA   SANHITA. 

various  means  of  maintaining  life.    Ushas  has  given 
back  all  the  regions. 

7.  The  daughter  of  heaven,  young,  white-robed, 
the  mistress  of  all  earthly  treasure,  is  beheld  dissi- 
pating the  darkness.  Auspicious  Ushas,  shine 
upon  us,  to-day,  in  this  (hall  of  sacrifice). 

8.  Following  the  path  of  the  mornings  that  have 
passed,  and  first  of  the  endless  mornings  that  are 
to  come,  Ushas,  the  disperser  of  darkness,  arouses 
living  beings,  and  awakens  every  one  (that  lay)  as 
dead. 

9.  Ushas,  inasmuch  as  thou  hast  caused  the 
sacred  fire  to  be  kindled,''  inasmuch  as  thou  hast 
lighted  the  world  with  the  light  of  the  sun,  inasmuch 
as  thou  hast  wakened  men  to  perform  sacrifice,  thou 
hast  done  good  service  to  the  gods. 

10.  For  how  long  a  period  is  it  that  the  dawns 
have  risen  ?  For  how  long  a  period  will  they  rise  ? 
Still  desirous  to  bring  us  light,  Ushas  pursues  the 
functions  of  those  that  have  gone  before,  and, 
shining  brightly,  proceeds  with  the  others  (that  are 
to  follow). 

Vargaiii.  H.  Those  mortals  who  beheld  the  pristine  Ushas 
dawning  have  passed  away  :  to  us  she  is  now  visible ; 
and  they  approach  who  may  behold  her  in  after- 
times. 

12.  The  beings  hostile  (to  acts  of  devotion)  now 
withdraw  ;  ^  for  she  is  the  protectress  of  sacred  rites, 

*  Fires  for  burnt-offerings  being  properly  lighted  at  the  dawn. 
RdhJtasas  and  other  malignant  spirits  vanish,  with  the  dawn. 


FIEST  ASHTAKA — EIGHTH   ADHYATA.  299 

who  is  manifested  for  their  performance ;  she  is 
the  giver  of  happiness,  the  awakener  of  pleasant 
voices,  the  enjoyer  of  felicity,  and  provider  of  food 
for  the  gods.  Most  excellent  Ushas,  dawn,  to-day, 
on  this  (sacrificial  hall). 

13.  The  divine  Ushas  dawned  continually,  in 
former  times :  the  source  of  wealth,  she  still  rises 
on  this  (world).  So  will  she  give  light  hereafter, 
through  future  days;  for,  exempt  from  decay,  or 
death,  she  goes  on  in  her  splendour. 

14.  The  divine  Ushas  lights  up,  with  her  beams, 
the  quarters  of  the  heavens :  she  has  thrown  off 
her  gloomy  form,  and,  awaking  (those  who  sleep), 
comes  in  her  car  drawn  by  purple  steeds. 

15.  Bringing,  with  her,  life- sustaining  blessings, 
and  giving  consciousness  (to  the  unconscious),  she 
imparts  (to  the  world)  her  wonderful  radiance.  The 
similitude  of  the  numerous  dawns  that  have  gone 
by,  the  first  of  the  brilliant  (dawns  that  are  to  come), 
Ushas  has  to-day  appeared. 

16.  Arise  !     Inspiring  life  revives  ;  darkness  has    Vaigaiv. 
departed ;    light   approaches.      Ushas   has   opened 

the  road  for  the  sun  to  travel.  Let  us  repair  to 
where  they  distribute  food. 

17.  The  ofi'erer  of  praise,  the  reciter  of  praise, 
celebrating  the  brilliant  Ushasas,  repeats  the  well- 
connected  words  (of  the  Veda).  Possessor  of  afilu- 
ence,  dawn,  to-day,  upon  him  who  praiseth  thee ; 
bestow  upon  us  food,  whence  progeny  may  be  ob- 
tained. 

18.  May  he  who  has  offered  the  libation  ob"-^^*^ 


300  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

upon  the  conclusion  of  his  praises,  (enunciated), 
like  the  wind,  (with  speed, — the  favour  of)  those 
UsHASAS  who  are  givers  of  horses,  and  of  cattle, 
and  of  progeny,  and  who  shed  light  upon  the  mortal 
presenting  to  them  (offerings). 

19.  Mother  of  the  gods,^  rival  of  Aditi,  illumin- 
ator of  the  sacrifice,  mighty  Ushas,  shine  forth : 
approving  of  our  prayer,  dawn  upon  us.  Do  thou, 
who  art  cherished  by  all,  make  us  eminent  among 
the  people. 

20.  Whatever  valuable  wealth  the  Ushasas  con- 
vey is  beneficial  to  the  sacrificer  and  to  the  praiser. 
May  MiTRA,  Varuna,  Aditi,  ocean,  earth,  and 
heaven,  be  favourable  to  this  (our  prayer). 


SuKTA  IX.  (cxiy.) 

The  deity  is  Ettdea  ;  tlie  Rishi,  Kutsa,     The  tenth  and  eleventh 
verses  are  in  the  TrisMuhh  metre ;  the  rest,  in  the  Jagat'i. 

Varga  V.         1.  We  offcr  these  praises  to  the  mighty  Eudra," 

"•  The  gods  are  awakened  at  dawn,  by  the  worship  they  then 
receive ;  and,  hence,  the  dawn  may  be  said,  figuratively,  to  be 
their  parent  {mdtd  devdndni) ;  and,  in  that  character,  she  is  the 
enemy,  or  rival,  of  Aditi,  who  is  their  mother. 

^  We  have  a  repetition,  here,  of  the  usual  etymologies  of  Rudra, 
with  some  additions  :  He  causes  all  to  weep  {rodayati)  at  the  end 
of  the  world ;  or  rut  may  signify  *  pain,' — the  pain  of  living, 
which  he  drives  away  {drdvayati)  \  or  rut  may  mean  *  word,'  or 
*  text,'  or  the  TTpanishads  of  the  Vedas,  by  which  he  is  approached, 
or  propitiated  {druyate) ;  or  rut  may  mean  *  holy  or  divine  speech,' 
or  *  wisdom,'  which  he  confers  {rdti)  upon  his  worshippers ;  or 


FIRST   ASHTAKA— EIGHTH   ADHYAYA.  301 

with  the  braided  hair/  the  destroyer  of  heroes,''  in 
order  that  health  may  be  enjoyed  by  bipeds  and 
quadrupeds,  and  that  all  beings  in  this  village  may 
be  (well-)  nourished,  and  exempt  from  disease. 

2.  Be  gracious  to  us,  Etjdra.  Grant  us  happiness ; 
for  we  worship  the  destroyer  of  heroes  with  obla- 
tions. And,  by  thy  directions,  Rubra,  may  we 
obtain  that  freedom  from  disease,  and  exemption 
from  dangers,  which  our  progenitor,  Manu,  bestowed 
upon  us,  (having  obtained  them  from  the  gods). 

3.  EuDRA,  showerer  (of  benefits),  may  we  obtain, 
through  our  worship  of  the  gods,  the  favour  of  thee, 
who  art  the  destroyer  of  heroes.  Come  to  our  pos- 
terity, purposing  to  promote  their  happiness,  while 
we,  having  our  sons  in  safety,  offer  thee  oblations. 

4.  We  invoke,  for  our  preservation,  the  illustrious 

rw^  may  mean  'darkness,'  that  which  invests  or  ohstmcts  {ruiiaddhi) 
all  things,  and  which  he  dissipates  {drindti).  Or,  again,  it  is  said, 
that,  while  the  gods  were  engaged  in  battle  with  the  Asuras, 
Rudra,  identified  with  Agni,  came  and  stole  their  treasure : 
after  conquering  the  enemy,  the  gods  searched  for  the  stolen 
wealth,  and  recovered  it  from  the  thief,  who  wept  {arudat) ;  and 
Agni  was,  thence,  called  Rudra. 

*  Kapardine,  from  haparda,  of  which  one  meaning  is,  ihojafd, 
or  braided  hair,  of  S'iva,  whence  the  Scholiast  gives,  as  its  equi- 
valent, jat'ildya.  This  looks  very  like  a  recognition  of  S'iva  in 
the  person  of  Rudra.  It  is  not  easy  to  suggest  any  other  inter- 
pretation, unless  the  term  be  an  interpolation. 

^  Kshayad  virdya,  in  whom  heroes  (virdli)  perish  {vinasyanti). 
Or  it  may  mean,  of  whom  the  imperial  {kshayantah prdptaiswarydh) 
heroes  (that  is,  the  Maruts)  are  the  sons.  The  epithet  is  repeated 
in  the  following  verses. 


302  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

EuDRA,  the  accomplislier  of  sacrifices,"  the  tortuous," 
the  wise.  May  he  remove  far  from  us  his  celestial 
wrath ;  for  we  earnestly  solicit  his  favour, 

5.  We  invoke,  from  heaven,  with  reverence,  him 
who  has  excellent  food,°  who  is  radiant,  and  has 
braided  hair,  who  is  brilliant,  and  is  to  be  ascertained 
(by  sacred  study),  holding,  in  his  hands,  excellent 
medicaments.  May  he  grant  us  health,  defensive 
armour,  and  a  (secure)  dwelling. 
VargaVi.  6.  This  praisc,  the  sweetest  of  the  sweet,  and 
cause  of  increase  (to  the  reciter),  is  addressed  to 
EuDRA,    the   father   of    the   Maruts.*^       Imm'ortal 

*  Tajnasddham,  i.e.,  sddhayitdram,  he  who  makes  the  sacrifice 
well-desired,  or  perfect  {swisht'am,  or  su  isht'am.) 

^  Vanku,  he  who  goes  crookedly.  "What  is  meant  by  this  is 
not  explained. 

*=  The  phrase  is  vardha,  literally,  a  boar  ;  and  one  who  has  a 
hard  body,  like  a  boar's,  may  be  intended.  But  the  Scholiast 
prefers  considering  it  as  an  abbreviation  of  vardhdra,  from  vara, 
good,  and  dhdra,  food. 

^  The  paternity  of  Rudra,  with  respect  to  the  Maruts,  is  thus 
accounted  for  by  the  Scholiast:  "After  their  birth  from  Dili, 
under  the  circumstances  told  in  the  Piirdiias  ( Vishnu  Purdiia, 
p.  152),  they  were  beheld  in  deep  affliction  by  S'iva  and  Pdnati,  as 
they  were  passing  sportively  along.  The  latter  said  to  the  former  : 
'If  you  love  me,  ti'ansform  these  lumps  of  flesh  into  boys.' 
Maliesa  accordingly  made  them  boys,  of  like  form,  like  age,  and 
similarly  accoutred,  and  gave  them  to  Fdrvati,  as  her  sons, 
whence  they  are  called  the  sons  of  Eudra."  The  N'lti-manjar'i 
adds  other  legends  ;  one,  that  Pdrvnt'i,  hearing  the  lamentations 
of  Diti,  entreated  Siva  to  give  the  shapeless  births  forms,  telling 
them  not  to  weep  (ma  rod'ih) ;  another,  that  he  actually  begot 


FIEST   ASHTAKA — EIGHTH   ADHTAYA.  303 

EuDRA,  grant  us  food  sufficient  for  mortals,  and  be- 
stow happiness  on  me,  my  son,  and  my  grandson. 

7.  Injure  not,  Eudea,  those,  amongst  us,  who  are 
old,  or  young,  who  are  capable  of  begetting,  or  who 
are  begotten,  nor  a  father,  nor  a  mother ;  nor  afflict 
our  precious  persons. 

8.  Harm  us  not,  Eudea,  in  our  sons,  or  grandsons, 
or  other  male  descendants,  nor  in  our  cattle,  nor  in 
our  horses.  InJ&amed  with  anger,  kill  not  our  valiant 
men  ;  for  we,  presenting  clarified  butter,  perpetually 
invoke  thee. 

9.  I  restore  to  thee  the  praises  (derived  from 
thee);  as  a  shepherd  (returns  his  sheep  to  their 
owner).  Father  of  the  Maruts,  bestow  happiness 
uj)on  me.  Thy  auspicious  benignity  is  the  cause  of 
successive  delight :  therefore,  we  especially  solicit 
thy  protection. 

10.  Destroyer  of  heroes,  may  thy  cow-killing 
or  man-slaying  (weapon)  be  far  away  ;  and  let  the 
felicity  granted  by  thee  be  ours.  Favour  us  !  Speak, 
brilliant  hero,  in  our  behalf ;  and  grant  us,  thou  who 
art  mighty  over  the  two  (realms  of  heaven  and 
earth),  prosperity. 

11.  Desirous  of  protection,  we  have  said:  Eever- 
ence  be  to  him.     May  Eudea,   with   the   Maeuts, 

them,  in  the  form  of  a  bull,  on  Prithiv'i,  the  Earth,  as  a  covs^. 
These  stories  arc,  evidently,  fictions  of  a  much  later  era  than  that 
of  the  Vedas, — being  borrowed,  if  not  fabricated,  from  the  Tantras, 
— and  may  be  set  aside,  without  hesitation,  as  utterly  failing  to 
explain  the  meaning  of  those  passages  in  the  Vedas,  which  call 
the  Maruts  the  sons  of  Rudra. 


304  RIG-YEDA   SANHItA. 

hear  our  invocation :  and  may  Mitra,  Yaruna, 
Aditi,  ocean,  earth,  and  heaven,  be  favourable  to 
this  (our  prayer). 


Si5kta  X.  (CXV.) 
Ktjtsa  is  the  Rishi ;  the  deity  is  Sxjkta  ;    the  metre,  TrisMubh. 

Vargavii.  1.  The  wouderful  host  of  rays  has  risen;  the 
eye  of  Mitra,  Yaruna,  and  Agni;''  the  sun,  the 
soul  of  all  that  moves  or  is  immoveable,"  has  filled 
(with  his  glory,)  the  heaven,  the  earth,  and  the 
firmament. 

2.  The  sun  follows  the  divine  and  brilliant  Ushas, 
— as  a  man  (follows  a  young  and  elegant)  woman, — 
at  which  season  pious  men  perform  (the  ceremonies 
established  for)  ages,*"  worshipping  the  auspicious 
(sun),  for  the  sake  of  good  (reward). 

*  Or  chahhus  may  mean  '  the  enlightener.'  Mitra,  Varuna, 
and  Agni  are  said  to  be  typical  of  the  world, — or  of  the  seasons, 
perhaps,  over  which  they  preside. 

*•  A'tmd  jagatah,  '  the  soul  of  the  world ;'  from  his  pervading  and 
animating  all  things.  Or  jagatah  may  be  rendered  '  of  what  is 
moveable  :'  it  is  followed  by  tasthushah,  'of  that  which  is  fixed.' 
The  sun  is  the  cause  of  all  effects,  whether  moveable  or  im- 
moveable,— {sa  hi  sarvasya  sthdvarajangamdtmakasya  hdryavar- 
gasya  Icdranani). 

•=  Yugdni,  which  may  also  be  rendered  '  yokes  for  ploughs ;' 
for,  at  this  season  (dawn),  men,  seeking  to  propitiate  the  gods  by 
the  profit  which  agriculture  yields,  equip  their  ploughs,  or  engage 
in  the  labours  of  the  field. 


FIEST   ASHTAKA — EIGHTH   ADHYATA.  305 

3.  The  auspicious,  swift  horses  of  the  sun,  well- 
limbed,  road-traversing,  who  merit  to  be  pleased 
with  praise,  reverenced  by  us,  have  ascended  to  the 
summit  of  the  sky,  and  quickly  circumambulate 
earth  and  heaven. 

4.  Such  is  the  divinity,  such  is  the  majesty,  of 
the  sun,  that,  when  he  has  set,  he  has  withdrawn 
(into  himself)  the  diffused  (light  which  had  been  shed) 
upon  the  unfinished  task.^  When  he  has  unyoked 
his  coursers  from  his  car,  then  night  extends  the 
veiling  darkness  over  all. 

5.  The  sun,  in  the  sight  of  Mitra  and  Yaruna,'' 
displays  his  form  (of  brightness)  in  the  middle  of 
the  heavens;  and  his  rays''  extend,  on  one  hand,  his 
infinite  and  brilliant  power,  or,  on  the  other,  (by 
their  departure),  bring  on  the  blackness  of  night. 

6.  This  day,  gods,  with  the  rising  of  the  sun, 
deliver  us  from  heinous  sin :  and  may  Mitra,  Va- 
RUNA,  Aditi,  ocean,  earth,  and  heaven,  be  favour- 
able to  this  (our  prayer). 

*  Madhyd  kartor  vitatam,  "spread  in  the  middle  of  the  affair;" 
that  is,  the  cultivator,  or  artisan,  desists  from  his  labour, 
although  unfinished,  upon  the  setting  of  the  sun. 

^  Mitra  and  Varuna  are  used,  according  to  the  commentary, 
by  metonymy,  for  the  world. 

"  Haritah,  which  may  mean,  also,  his  horses. 


2i 


306  EIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 


ANUVAKA    XVII. 

SUKTA    I.    (CXYI.) 

The  deities  are  the  Aswins  ;  the  RisM  is  Kakshivat  ;  the  metre 
is  TrisMulh. 

YargaViir.  1.  In  like  manner  as  a  worshipper  strews  the 
sacred  grass  for  the  JN'asatyas,  so  do  I  urge  on 
their  laudations, — as  the  wind  drives  on  the  clouds, — 
they  who  gave  a  bride  to  the  youthful  Yimada," 
and  bore  her  away  in  their  car,  outstripping  the 
rival  host. 

2.  Ki-SATTAS,  borne  by  strong  and  rapid  (steeds), 
and  (urged)  by  the  encouragements  of  the  gods, 
the  ass^  of  you,  thus  instigated,  overcame  a  thousand 
(enemies),  in  conflict,  in  the  war  grateful  to  Yama. 

3.  TuGEA,''  verily,  Aswins,  sent  (his  son,)  Bhujyu 

^  See  p.  294.  The  story  told  by  the  Scholiast  is,  that  Vimada, 
having  won  his  bride  at  a  swayamvara,  or  '  choice  of  a  husband 
by  a  princess,'  was  stopped,  on  his  way  home,  by  his  unsuccessful 
competitors,  when  the  Aswins  came  to  his  succour,  and  placed 
the  bride  in  their  chariot,  repulsed  the  assailants,  and  carried 
the  damsel  to  the  residence  of  the  prince. 

^  An  ass  {rdsahJia)  given  by  Frajdpati.  The  chariot  of  the 
Aswins  is  drawn  by  two  asses  {rdsdbhdvaiwinoh) — NighaMu,  I., 
14.  Or  it  may  mean  "  one  going  swiftly ;"  and  the  rest  of  the 
passage,  "obtained  precedence,  for  the  Aswins,  over  other  gods  in 
the  oblation,  through  his  mastering  the  stanzas  declared  by 
Prajdpati.''^ 

•^  See  p.  289.  Tugra,  it  is  said,  was  a  great  friend  of  the  Asivins. 
Being  much  annoyed  by  enemies  residing  in  a  different  island, 


FIRST   ASHTAKA EIGHTH   ADHYATA.  307 

to  sea  ;  as  a  dying  man  parts  with  his  riches.  But 
you  brought  him  back  in  vessels  of  your  own,  float- 
ing over  the  ocean,  and  keeping  out  the  waters. 

4.  Three  nights  and  three  days,  I^asatyas,  have 
you  conveyed  Bhujyu,  in  three  rapid,  revolving 
cars,  having  a  hundred  wheels,  and  draw^n  by  six 
horses, ""  along  the  dry  bed  of  the  ocean,  to  the  shore 
of  the  sea. 

5.  This  exploit  you  achieved,  Aswins,  in  the 
ocean,  where  there  is  nothing  to  give  support, 
nothing  to  rest  upon,  nothing  to  cling  to, — that  you 
brought  Bhujyu,  sailing  in  a  hundred-oared  ship,^ 
to  his  father's  house. 

6.  Aswins,  the  white  horse  you  gave  to  Pedu —    varga  ix. 
whose  horses  were  indestructible, — was  ever,  to  him, 
success.     That,  your  precious  gift,  is  always  to  be 
celebrated:    the  horse  of  Pedu,   the   scatterer   (of 
enemies),  is  always  to  be  invoked.'' 

he  sent  his  son  Bhujyu  against  them,  with  an  army,  on  board  ship. 
After  sailing  some  distance,  the  vessel  foundered  in  a  gale.  Bhujyu 
applied  to  the  Aswins,  who  brought  him  and  his  troops  back,  in 
their  own  ships,  in  three  days'  time,  as  appears  from  this  and  the 
two  following  stanzas. 

*  This  is  a  rather  unintelligible  account  of  a  sea-voyage, 
although  the  words  of  the  text  do  not  admit  of  any  other  ren- 
dering. 

•*  S'atdritrdm  ndvam,  a  ship  with  a  hundred,  that  is,  with  many, 
oars.     This  stanza  is  consistent  with  the  first  of  the  triad, 

"  Pedu,  it  is  said,  was  a  certain  Rdjarshi,  who  worshipped  the 
Aiwins:  they,  therefore,  gave  him  a  white  horse,  through  the 
possession  of  which  he  was  always  victorious  over  his  enemies. 
[See  Vol.  IV.,  p.  154.] 


308  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

7.  You  gave,  leaders  (of  sacrifice),  to  Kakshivat, 
of  the  race  of  Pajea,""  various  knowledge:  you 
filled,  from  the  hoof  of  your  vigorous  steed,  as  if 
from  a  cask,  a  hundred  jars  of  wine.^ 

8.  You  quenched,  with  cold  (water),  the  blazing 
flames  (that  encompassed  Atri),  and  supplied  him 
with  food-supported  strength:  you  extricated  him, 
AswiNS,  from  the  dark  (cavern)  into  which  he  had 
been  thrown  headlong,  and  restored  him  to  every 
kind  of  welfare." 

9.  Nasatyas,  you  raised  up  the  well,  and  made 
the  base,  which  had  been  turned  upwards,  the 
curved  mouth,  so  that  the  water  issued,  for  the 
beverage  of  the  thirsty  Gotama,  the  offerer."^ 

10.  Nasatyas,  you  stripped  off,  from  the  aged 
Chyavana,  his  entire  skin,  as  if  it  had  been  a  coat 
of  mail ; "  you  reversed,  Dasras,  the  life  of  the  sage 


'^  Paj'ras  is  another  name  for  Angirasas,  in  which  race  Kah- 
sMvat  was  born. 

''  No  account  of  the  occasion  of  this  miracle  is  given. 

"  See  p.  290,  note  b. 

*  This  has  been  elsewhere  related  of  the  Maruts  (p.  221).  The 
manner  in  which  the  well  was  presented  to  Gotama  is  somewhat 
obscurely  described.     [See  Vols.  III.  and  IV.,  passim.~\ 

^  The  restoration  of  the  ascetic  Chyavana  to  youth  and  beauty 
is  related  in  several  Purdnas ;  following,,  probably,  the  Mahd- 
IMrata,  Vana-parva,  (Vol.  I.,  p.  577).  He  is  there  called  the  son 
of  Bhrigu,  and  was  engaged  in  penance,  near  the  Narmadd  river, 
until  the  white  ants  constructed  their  nests  round  his  body,  and 
left  only  his  eyes  visible.  Stihanyd,  the  daughter  of  King  S'arydti, 
having  come  to  the  place,  and  seeing  two  bright  spots  in  what 


FIRST  ASHTAKA — EIGHTH  ADHTAYA.     309 

who  was  without  kindred,  and  constituted  him  the 
husband  of  many  maidens. 

11.  Nasattas,  leaders,  glorious  was  that  exploit    ^^""^^  ^• 
of  yours,  one  to  be   celebrated,  to  be  adored,  to  be 
desired  by  us,  when,  becoming  aware  (of  the  circum- 
stance), you  extricated  Vandana,  (hidden,)  like  a 
concealed  treasure,  from  the  (well)  that  was  visible 

(to  travellers).^ 

12.  I  proclaim,  leaders  (of  sacrifice),  for  the  sake 
of  acquiring  wealth,  that  inimitable  deed  which 
you  performed, — as  the  thunder  (announces)  rain, — 
when,  provided,  by  you,  with  the  head  of  a  horse, 

seemed  to  be  an  ant-hill,  pierced  them  with  a  stick.  The  sage 
visited  the  offence  upon  S'arydti  and  his  attendants,  and  was 
appeased  only  by  the  promise  of  the  king  to  give  him  his 
daughter  in  marriage.  Subsequently,  the  Aswhis,  coming  to  his 
hermitage,  compassionated  Sukanyas  union  with  so  old  and  ugly 
a  husband  as  Chyavana,  and,  having  made  trial  of  her  fidelity, 
bestowed  on  the  sage  a  similar  condition  of  youth  and  beauty  to 
their  own.  This  story  does  not  seem  to  be  the  same,  however, 
as  that  of  the  text,  in  which  no  allusion  occurs  to  Sulcanyd,  and 
the  transformation  of  Chyavana  precedes  his  matrimonial  con- 
nexion. He  is  termed  j'ahif a,  in  the  text, — properly,  '  abandoned ;' 
that  is,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  by  sons,  and  others  fj^uird- 
dihhih  parityaldali)  :  but  it  may  denote,  perhaps,  merely  his 
solitary  condition  as  an  ascetic.  In  return  for  their  friendly  office, 
Chyavana  compelled  Indra  to  assent  to  the  Aswins'  receiving,  at 
sacrifices,  a  share  of  the  Soma  libation,  which  is  not  noticed  in 
the  text. 

"■  See  p.  289.      For   '  well '   we  have  only  darsatdt,    in  the 
text, — that  which  was  to  be  seen  by  thirsty  travellers,  according         • 
to  the  commentary. 


310  RIG- VEDA    SANHItI. 

DadhyacHj  the  son  of  Atharvan,''  taught  you  the 
mystic  science. 

13.  The  intelligent  (Vadhrimati) '^  invoked  you, 
Ni-SATYASj  Avho  are  the  accomplishers  (of  desires), 
and  the  protectors  of  many,  with  a  sacred  hymn  : 
her  prayer  was  heard, — like  (the  instructions  of)  a 
teacher ; — and  you.  As  wins,  gave,  to  the  wife  of  an 
impotent  husband,  Hiranyahasta,  her  son. 

14.  Nasatyas,  leaders,  you  liberated  the  quail 
from  the  mouth  of  the  dog"^  that  had  seized  her ; 


*  We  have,  here,  rather  obscure  allusions  to  a  legend  which  wag, 
probably,  afterwards  modified  by  the  Piirdnas,  in  which  the  name 
also  occurs  as  Dadh'icha  (see,  also,  p.  216).  In  the  Mahdlhdrata, 
Vana-parva,  (Vol.  I.,  p.  554),  it  is  merely  related,  that  the  gods, 
being  oppressed  by  the  Kdlalccya  Asuras,  solicited,  from  the  sage 
Dadhicha,  his  bones,  which  he  gave  them,  and  from  which 
Twaslit'ri  fabricated  the  thunderbolt  with  which  Inclra  slew  Vritra 
and  routed  the  Asuras.  The  legend  of  the  text  differs  from 
this.  Indra,  having  taught  the  sciences  called  pravargtjavidyd 
and  madlmvidyd  to  Dadhjacli,  threatened  that  he  would  eut  off 
his  head,  if  ever  he  taught  them  to  any  one  else.  The  A.swins 
prevailed  upon  him,  nevertheless,  to  teach  them  the  prohibited 
knowledge,  and,  to  evade  Indra' s  threat,  took  off  the  head  of  the 
sage,  replacing  it  by  that  of  a  horse.  Indra,  apprised  of  Badh- 
yacli's  breach  of  faith,  struck  off  his  equine  head  with  the 
thunderbolt ;  on  which  the  Aswins  restored  to  him  his  own.  The 
pravargyavidyd  is  said  to  imply  certain  verses  of  the  Rlh,  Yajur, 
and  Sdma  Vedas ;  and  the  madlmvidyd,  the  Brdhmana. 

^  Vadhrimat'i  was  the  wife  of  a  certain  RdjarsM  who  was 
impotent.  The  Akvins,  propitiated  by  her  prayers,  gave  her  a 
son. 

"^  Vrika,  more  usually,  '  a  wolf,'  but  here  said  to  be  synonymous 


FIEST   ASHTAKA — EIGHTH    ADHYATA.  311 

and  yoUj  who  are  benefactors  of  many,  have  granted, 
to  the  sage  who  praises  you,  to  behold  (true  wis- 
dom). 

15.  The  foot  of  (Yispala,  the  wife  of)  Khela 
was  cut  off,  like  the  wing  of  a  bird,  in  an  engage- 
ment by  night.  Immediately  you  gave  her  an  iron 
leg,  that  she  might  walk ;  the  hidden  treasure  (of 
the  enemy  being  the  object  of  the  conflict.)* 

16.  "When  his  father  caused  Rijeaswa" — as  he    Varga  xi. 
was  giving,  to  a  she-wolf,"  a  hundred  sheep  cut  up 

in  pieces, — to  become  blind,  you,  Daseas,  physicians 
(of  the  gods),  gave  him  eyes,  (that  had  been)  unable 
to  find  their  way,  with  which  he  might  see. 

17.  The  daughter  of  the  Sun"^  ascended  your  car, 

with  swan,  'a  dog.'  It  is  elsewhere  termed,  by  the  commentary, 
dranyaswan,  a  forest,  or  wild,  dog.  Ydsha  interprets  it  figura- 
tively, and  renders  ijilca  by  dditya,  'the  sun,'  from  whose  grasp, 
or  overpowering  radiance,  the  Asicins  are  said  to  have  rescued 
the  dawn,  upon  her  appeal  to  them. 

*  See  p.  291.  The  story  is  here  more  fully  detailed  in  the 
text.  It  is  only  added,  in  the  notes,  that  Khela  was  a  king,  of 
whom  Agastya  was  ih.Q  2^urohita  ;  and  it  was  through  his  prayers 
that  the  Aswms  gave  Vispald  an  iron  leg. 

''  Rijrdswa  was  one  of  the  sons  of  Vrishdgir  (see  p.  259)  : 
his  blindness  has  been  previously  alluded  to  (p.  290) ;  but  here 
we  have  the  story  in  detail. 

•^  The  vrik'i  was  one  of  the  asses  of  the  Aswins,  in  disguise, 
to  test  his  charitable  disposition;  but,  as  he  exacted  the  sheep 
from  the  people,  his  father  was  angry,  and  caused  him  to  lose 
his  eyesight,  which  the  Aswins  restored  to  him, 

^  Surya,  it  is  related,  was  desirous  of  giving  his  daughter 
Siiryd  to  Soma ;  but  all  the  gods  desired  her  as  a  wife.     They 


312  RIG- VEDA   SANHITA. 

(like  a  runner)  to  a  goal.  When  you  won  (the  race), 
with  your  swift  horse,  all  the  gods  looked  on,  with 
(anxious)  hearts,  and  you,  IS;  asatyas,  were  associated 
with  glory. 

18.  When,  AswiNS,  being  invited,  you  went  to 
his  dwelling,  (to  give  due  rewards)  to  Divodasa, 
offering  oblations,  then  your  helping  chariot  conveyed 
(food  and)  treasure,  and  the  bull  and  the  porpoise 
were  yoked  together.  "* 

19.  Nasatyas,  bearing  strength  and  wealth,  with 
posterity  and  vigour-sustaining  food,  you  came,  with 
one  intention,  to  the  family  of  Jahnu,^  (provided) 
with  (sacrificial)  viands,  and  possessing  a  third  portion 
of  the  daily  (offerings). 

20.  Undecaying  Nasatyas,  you  bore  away,  by 
night,  in  your  foe-overwhelming  car,  Jahusha,"  sur- 
rounded, on  every  side,  by  (enemies),  through  prac- 
ticable roads,  and  went  to  (inaccessible)  mountains. 


agreed  that  he  who  should  first  reach  the  sun,  as  a  goal,  should 
wed  the  damsel.  The  Aswins  were  victorious;  and  Suryd,  well 
pleased  by  their  success,  rushed,  immediately,  into  their  chariot. 

*  The  vrishalha  and  the  simumdra.  The  Commentator  calls 
the  latter,  grdlm,  which  is,  properly,  an  alligator.  But  the 
sisumdra,  as  it  is  usually  read,  is,  everywhere  else,  considered  to 
be  a  name  of  the  Gangetic  porpoise.  They  were  yoked  to  the 
car  of  the  Aswins,  the  comment  says,  to  display  their  power, 

*  Jahndv'i,  not  Jdhiav'i.  It  is  here  considered  as  an  adjective 
to  prajd,  progeny  {Jahnoh  *  prajdm).  Jahnu  is  called  a  MaJiarshi. 
He  is  a  prince  of  the  lunar  dynasty,  in  the  Purdnas  ( Vishnu 
Parana,  p.  398.) 

*=  The  name  of  a  certain  king.  We  have  nothing  relating  to 
him,  beyond  what  is  stated  in  the  text.     [See  Vol.  IV.,  p.  154.] 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — EIGHTH   ADHYATA.  313 

21.  You  iDreserved  Yasa,  As  wins,  (that  he  might    ^^argaXii. 
obtain),  in  a  single  day,  a  thousand  acceptable  gifts."" 
Showerers  (of  benefits),  associated  with  Indra,  you 
destroyed  the  malignant  enemies  of  Prithusravas.'' 

22.  You  raised  the  water  from  the  bottom,  to  the 
top,  of  the  well,  for  the  drinking  of  S'ara,  the  son 
of  Richatka;°  and,  by  your  powers,  Nasatyas,  you 
filled,  for  the  sake  of  the  weary  S'ayu,*^  the  barren 
cow  (with  milk). 

23.  Nasatyas,  by  your  acts  you  restored  to  Yis-        • 
WAKA,  the  son  of  Krishna,  soliciting  your  protec- 
tion, adoring  you,  and  a  lover  of  rectitude,  his  son 
YiSHNAPU,""  (welcome,)  to  his  sight,  as   an  animal 
that  had  been  lost. 

24.  AswiNS,  you  raised  up,  like  Soma  in  a  ladle, 
Eebha,^  who,  for  ten  nights  and  nine  days,  had  lain 
(in  a  well),  bound  with  tight  bonds,  wounded,  im- 
mersed, and  suff'ering  distress  from  the  water. 

25.  Thus,  As  WINS,  have  I  declared  your  exploits. 
May  I  become  the  master  (of  this  place),  having 
abundant  cattle  and  a  numerous  progeny,  and  re- 

*  Vasa,  a  Rishi,  it  is  said,  received  daily  presents,  to  the 
number  of  one  thousand.     (See  p.  291.) 

•*  "We  have  a  Prithusravas  amongst  the  Paurdiiik  princes  ;  but 
nothing  particular  is  recorded  of  him  {Vishnu  Purdna,  p.  420.) 

•^  Of  Sara,  called  A'rchat/ca,  or  the  son  of  Richatha,  nothing  is 
detailed. 

^  See  p.  293. 

®  We  have  no  particulars  of  Krishna,  Vtswaka,  and  Vishndpu, 
except  their  being  Rishis. 

'  See  p.  289. 


314  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

taining  my  sight,  and  enjoying  a  long  life.    May  I 
enter  into  old  age,  as  (a  master  enters)  his  house. 


Si5kta  II.  (CXVII.) 
Deities,  Rishi,  and  metre,  as  before. 

Varga  XIII.        \^  AswiNs,  for  your  gratification  by  the  pleasant 

Soma  juice,  your   ancient  worshipper  adores  you. 

,        The  offering  is  poured  upon  the  sacred  grass ;  the 

hymn  is  ready  (for  repetition).     Come,  Nasatyas, 

with  food  and  with  vigour.  . 

2.  With  that  car,  As  wins,  which,  rapid  as 
thought,  drawn  by  good  horses,  appears  before  men, 
and  with  which  you  repair  to  the  dwelling  of  the 
virtuous,  come,  leaders  of  (sacrifices),  to  our  abode. 

3.  You  liberated,  leaders  (of  rites),  the  sage 
Atri,^  who  was  venerated  by  the  five  classes  of 
men,  from  the  wicked  prison,  together  with  his 
troop  (of  children),  destroying  his  enemies,  and 
bafiling,  showerers  (of  benefits),  the  devices  of  the 
malignant  Dasyus. 

4.  Leaders  (of  sacrifice),  showerers  (of  benefits), 
you  restored  Rebha,'' — cast,  by  unassailable  (ene- 
mies), into  the  water,  and  wounded,  like  a  (sick) 
horse, — by  your  (healing)  skill.  Your  ancient  ex- 
ploits do  not  fade  (from  recollection). 

5.  You  extricated,  Dasras,  ih.Q  sage  Yandana,'' 
cast  into  a  well,  like  a  handsome  and  splendid  orna- 


See  p.  290.  *  See  p.  289.  "  See  p.  289. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — EIGHTH   ADHTATA.  315 

ment  designed  for  embellisliment,  and  (lying), 
As  WINS,  like  one  sleeping  on  the  lap  of  the  earth, 
or  like  the  sun  disappearing  in  darkness. 

6.  That  (exploit)  of  yours,   leaders  (of  sacrifice),    Varga  xiv. 
is  to  be  celebrated,  ISTasatyas,  by  Kakshivat,   of 

the  race  of  Pajea,  when  you  filled,  for  the  (expect- 
ant) man,  a  hundred  vases  of  sweet  (liquors)  from 
the  hoof  of  your  fleet  horse.^ 

7.  You  restored,  leaders  (of  sacrifices),  Yishnapu 
(his  lost  son,)  to  Viswaka,  the  son  of  Krishna, 
when  he  praised  you : ''  you  bestowed,  Aswins,  a 
husband  upon  Ghosha,  growing  old,  and  tarrying  in 
her  father's  dwelling. '^ 

8.  You  gave,  Aswins,  a  lovely  bride  to  S'yava  -^ 
you  gave  sight  to  Kanwa,''  unable  to  see  his  way. 
Showerers  (of  benefits),  the  deed  is  to  be  glorified 
by  which  you  gave  hearing  to  the  son  of  N"rishad.*^ 

9.  Aswins,  who  assume  many  forms,  you  gave 
to  Pedu^  a  swift  horse,  the  bringer  of  a  thousand 


^  See  p.  308.  "  See  p.  313. 

"  Ghosha  was  the  daughter  of  Kalcshivat.  She  was  a  leper, 
and,  therefore,  unfit  to  be  married ;  but,  when  advanced  in  years, 
she  prayed  to  the  Akvins,  who  healed  her  leprosy,  and  restored 
her  to  youth  and  beauty,  so  that  she  obtained  a  husband.  [See 
Vol.  II.,  p.  3.1 

^  S'yava,  a  Rishi,  had  the  black  leprosy,  but  was  cured  of  it 
by  the  Aswins,  and,  consequently,  married. 

®  The  blindness  of  Kaiiwa  is  not  adverted  to  in  any  of  his 
hymns  hitherto  met  with.     [See  Vol.  IV.,  p.  237.] 

*'  The  son  of  Nrishad  is  unnamed  :  he  is  termed  a  Rishi. 
\_Kanwai^  meant.     See  X.,  XXXI.,  11.]  ^  See  p.  307. 


316  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

(treasures),  powerful,  irresistible,  the  destroyer  of 
foes,  the  object  of  praise,  the  bearer  (over  dan- 
gers). 

10.  Liberal  givers,  these  your  exploits  are  to  be 
celebrated  ;  and  the  resounding  prayer  propitiates 
you,  while  abiding  in  heaven  and  earth.  When  the 
descendants  of  Pajea  invite  you,  Aswins,  come, 
with  food,  and  grant  strength  to  the  sage  (who 
worships  you). 
Varga  XV.  H.  AswiNS,  glorified  by  the  praises  of  the  son 
(of  the  jar),*  and  giving  food,  nourishers  (of  men)? 
to  the  sage  (Bhaeadwaja),  exalted  by  Agastya 
with  prayer,  you  restored,  Nasattas,  Vis'pala.^ 

12.  Whither  were  you  going,  sons  of  heaven, 
showerers  (of  benefits),  when,  on  your  way  to  the 
dwelling  of  Kavya,''  (to  receive  his)  adoration,  you 
raised  up  (Eebha),"^  Aswins,  on  the  tenth  day,"Jike 
a  buried  vessel  full  of  gold  ? 

13.  You  rendered,  by  your  power.  As  wins,  the 
aged  Chyavana  again  young.^  The  daughter  of 
the  sun,  Nasatyas,  invested  your  chariot  with 
beauty.^ 

14.  Dissipators  of  affliction,  as  you  were  praised, 
with  former  praises,  by  Tugra,  so  were  you,  again, 
adored  (by  him),  when  you  brought  Bhujyu  safe. 


*  "We  have  only  '  son'  (sunu) :  the  Scholiast  adds  hunibhdt 
prasutah,  that  is,  Agastya.  So,  again,  the  text  gives  only  viprdya, 
which  the  commentary  amplifies  by  Bharadwdjdya  rishaye. 

"  Seep.  311. 

*^   Usanas,  the  son  oi  Kavi.     [See  pp.  213  and  329.] 

^  See  p.  313.  «  See  p.  139.  '  See  p.  311. 


FIEST   ASHTAKA — EIGHTH   ADHYAYA.  617 

from  the  tossing  ocean,  with  swift  ships  ^  and  rapid 
horses. 

15.  The  son  of  Tugea,  brought  back  by  you, 
AswiNS,  (to  his  father),  glorified  you,  when  he  had 
crossed  the  ocean  in  safety ;  and  you  bore  him, 
showerers  (of  benefits),  with  your  well-harnessed 
car,  swift  as  thought,  to  safety. 

16.  The  quail  glorified  you.  As  wins,  when  you    varga  xvi. 
saved  her  from  the  mouth  of  the  wolf :  ^  you  carried 

off  (Jahusha)  to  the  top  of  the  mountain,  in  your 
triumphant  chariot,''  and  slew  the  son  of  Yishwach 
with  a  poisoned  (arrow).*^ 

17.  You  restored  eyes  to  Rijraswa,  who,  on 
presenting  a  hundred  sheep  to  the  she-wolf,  had 
been  condemned  to  darkness  by  his  indignant 
father,  and  gave  light  to  the  blind,  wherewith  to 
behold  all  things.*" 

18.  (Desiring)  that  the  enjoyment  (arising  from 
the  perfection)  of  the  senses  (should  be  restored  to 
the  blind),  the  she-wolf  invoked  you,  (saying) :  As- 
wiNS,  showerers  (of  benefits),  leaders  (of  sacrifices), 
RiJRAswA,  (lavish)  as  a  youthful  gallant,  (has  given 
me)  a  hundred  and  one  sheep,  cutting  them  into 
fragments. 

f  See  p.  289.  For  *  swift '  we  have  vilhih,  to  which  the 
Scholiast  adds,  naiibhih,  ships. 

*  Seep.  290.  «  Seep.  312. 

•*   Vishwdch  is  called  an  Asura :  the  text  says,   "  whose  son 
you  killed  with  poison : "  the  Commentator  explains  this  to  imply 
a  poisoned  arrow. 
.    "  Seep.  311. 


318  EIG-YEDA   SANHITA. 

19.  AswiNS,  your  powerful  protection  is  the 
source  of  happiness  :  worthy  of  Laudation,  you  have 
made  whole  the  maimed :  therefore  has  the  intel- 
ligent (Ghosha)''  called  upon  you.  Showerers  (of 
benefits),  come  hither,  with  your  succours. 

20.  Daseas,  you  filled  the  milkless,  barren,  and 
emaciated  cow  of  S'ayu  with  milk '}  you  brought, 
by  your  powers,  the  daughter  of  Pueumitra,  as  a 

wife,  to  YlMADA."^ 

Vargaxvii.  21.  AswiNS,  causiug  the  barley  to  be  sown  (in 
the  fields  that  had  been  prepared)  by  the  plough, 
milking  (the  clouds)  for  the  sake  of  Manu,  destroy- 
ing the  Dasyu  with  the  thunderbolt,  you  have  be- 
stowed brilliant  light  upon  the  Arya.^ 

22.  You  replaced.  As  wins,  with  the  head  of  a 
horse,  (the  head  of)  Dadhicha,  the  son  of  Athar- 
VAN ;  and,  true  to  his  promise,  he  revealed  to  you 
the  mystic  knowledge  which  he  had  learned  from 
TwASHTRi,  and  which  was  as  a  ligature  of  the  waist 
to  you.^ 

23.  Sapient  AswiNS,  I  ever  solicit  your  favour. 

^  Seep.  315.  ^  Seep.  293. 

•=  See  p.  294.  It  is  only  said,  of  Purumitra,  that  he  was  a 
certain  Raj  a. 

•^  Arydya.  The  Scholiast  explains  this,  vidmhe,  'to  the  sage,' 
that  is,  to,  or  upon,  Manu;  but  the  previous  occurrence  oiDasyu 
appears  to  warrant  the  understanding  of  Arya  as  its  contrast,  and 
to  treat  it  as  a  national  appellative.  It  may,  also,  be  observed, 
that  the  text  has  Ilanusha,  which,  the  Scholiast  says,  is,  here,  a 
synonym  of  Manu,  but  which,  more  usually,  designates  man. 

®  Twasht'ri  is,  here,  considered  synonymous  with  Indra.     The 


FIEST   ASHTAKA — EIGHTH   ADHTATA.  319 

Protect  all  my  religious  duties,  and  grant,  1*^asat- 
TAS,  abundant  and  excellent  wealth,  together  with 
offspring. 

24.  Liberal  AswiNS,  leaders  (of  sacrifices),  you 
gave  to  Yadhrimati  her  son  Hiranyahasta.* 
Bounteous  AswiNS,  you  restored  to  life  the  triply- 
mutilated  S'yava.^ 

25.  These  your  ancient  exploits.  As  wins,  our 
forefathers  have  celebrated ;  and  we  offer  adoration 
to  you,  showerers  (of  benefits),  repeating  your 
praises,  accompanied  by  our  dependants. 


SiJkta  III.  (CXYIII.) 
The  deities,  EisM,  and  metre,  as  before. 

1.  May  your  elegant   and   rich  car,  swift  as  a  Vargaxviii. 
hawk,  come,  As  wins,  to  our  presence ;  for  it  is  as 

quick  as  the  mind  of  man,  surmounted,  showerers 
(of  benefits),  by  three  columns,  and  rapid  as  the 
wind. 

2.  Come  to  us,  with  your  tri-columnar,  triangular, 
three-wheeled,'  and  well-constructed  car ;  replenish 
our  cows  (with  milk) ;  give  spirit  to  our  horses ; 
and  augment,  As  wins,  our  posterity. 


knowledge  was  kahhjam  vdm, — *  a  girdle  to  you  both ;'  strength- 
ening them  to  perform  religious  rites. 

"  See  p.  310. 

*  He  was  cut  into  three  pieces, — by  the  Asuras,  it  is  said, — 
which  were  reunited  into  one  by  the  Aswins. 

•=  See  p.  94. 


320  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA. 

3.  Daseas,  (having  come,)  with  your  quick- 
moving,  well-constructed  car,  hear  this  hymn,  (re- 
cited by  one)  who  reveres  you.  Do  not  the  ancient 
sages  say  that  you  are  most  prompt.  As  wins,  (to 
avert)  poverty  from  the  worshipper  ? 

4.  May  your  quick-moving,  prancing  steeds, 
rapid  as  hawks,  yoked  to  your  car,  bear  you,  As- 
wiNS,  (hither),  who,  quick  as  (falling)  water,  like 
vultures  flying  through  the  air,  convey  you,  Nasat- 
YAS,  to  the  sacrifice. 

5.  Leaders  (of  sacrifice),  the  youthful  daughter 
of  SuRYA  ascended,  delighted,  this  your  car.^  May 
your  strong-bodied,  prancing,  fleet,  and  shining 
horses  bring  you  near  us. 

VargaXix.  6.  By  your  deeds,  Dasras,  you  raised  up  Yan- 
DANA,  and,  showerers  (of  benefits),  Eebha;  you 
bore  the  son  of  Tugea  over  the  sea,  and  made 
Chyavana  young. 

7.  You  (gave  relief)  to  the  imprisoned  Atei, 
(quenching)  the  scorching  heat,  and  fed  him  with 
grateful  food :  solicitous  of  worthy  praise,  you  gave 
sight  to  Kanwa,  blinded  (by  darkness). 

8.  You  filled  his  cow  with  milk,  As  wins,  for  the 
ancient  S'ayu,  when  imploring  (your  aid) ;  you  li- 
berated the  quail  from  danger ;  you  gave  a  leg  to 
Yispala. 


"•  In  this  and  most  of  the  following  verses,  we  have  allusions 
to  the  same  persons  and  incidents  as  have  been  previously  noticed, 
in  most  instances,  repeatedly,  but  in  general,  in  this  hymn,  more 
summarily. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA — EIGHTH    ADHYATA.  321 

9.  You  gave  to  Pedu,  Aswixs,  the  white  and 
foe-trampling  steed  which  you  had  received  from 
Indra,  loud-neighing  (in  battle),  defying  enemies, 
high-spirited,  the  acquirer  of  a  thousand  treasures, 
vigorous,  and  firm  in  body. 

10.  Earnestly  we  call  you,  leaders  (of  the  sacri- 
fice), such  (as  you  have  been  described),  and  who 
are  well-born,  to  our  succour, — soliciting,  Aswins, 
wealth.  Contented  with  our  laudations,  come  to  us, 
with  your  wealthy  car,  to  bring  us  felicity. 

11.  Come  to  us,  auspicious  Nasattas,  with  the 
fresh  velocity  of  a  hawk.  Bearing  an  oblation,  I 
invoke  you,  Aswins,  at  the  rising  of  the  ever-con- 
stant dawn. 


SUKTA    IV.    (CXIX.) 

Rishi  and  deities,  the  same  ;  the  metre  is  Jagati. 

1.  Desiring  food,  I  invoke,  (Aswins),  to  support    Varga  xx. 
my  life,  your  wonderful  car,  swift  as  thought,  drawn 

by  fleet  horses,  worthy  of  veneration,  many-ban- 
nered, bringing  rain,  containing  wealth,  abundantly 
yielding  delight,  and  conferring  riches. 

2.  Upon  its  moving,  our  minds  have  been  raised 
on  high,  in  praise ;  our  hymns  reach  (the  Aswins). 
I  sweeten  the  oblation  :  the  assistants  come  nigh : 
IJRjANi^  (the  daughter  of  the  sun,)  has  ascended, 
Aswins,  your  car. 

3.  When  devout  and  imnumbered  (men),   victo- 


"  See  p.  311,  where  she  is  named  Suryd. 


322  RIG-YEDA   SANHITA. 

rious  in  battle,  mutually  contending  for  wealth, 
come  together,  your  car,  AswiNS,  is  perceived,  on 
its  downward  course,  in  which  you  bear  excellent 
(treasure)  to  the  worshipper. 

4.  You  brought  back,  to  his  ancestors,  Bhujtu, 
who,  borne  by  his  own  steeds,  had  perished,  (but 
that  you  rescued  him)  with  your  self-harnessed 
horses,  and  went,  showerers  (of  benefits),  to  his 
distant  dwelling  :  and  great  was  the  succour  which, 
it  is  known,  you  rendered  to  Divodasa. 

5.  As  WINS,  your  admirable  (horses)  bore  the  car 
which  you  had  harnessed,  (first,)  to  the  goal,  for  the 
sake  of  honour;  and  the  damsel  who  was  the 
prize  came,  through  affection,  to  you,  and  acknow- 
ledged your  (husbandship),  saying  :  You  are  (my) 
lords. 

Yargaxxi.  g,  Yq-q  prescrvcd  Eebha  from  the  violence 
around  him ;  you  quenched,  with  snow,  for  Atei, 
the  scorching  heat ;  you  generated  milk,  in  the  cow 
of  S'ayu  ;  and  (by  yoi^)  was  Yandana  endowed  with 
prolonged  life. 

7.  Skilful  Dasras,  you  restored  Yandana,  when 
debilitated  by  old  age  ;  as  a  (wheelwright  repairs  a 
worn-out)  car  :  (moved)  by  his  praises,  you  brought 
forth  the  sage''  (Yamadeya)  from  the  womb.  May 
your  (glorious)  deeds  be  (displayed)  for  him  who,  in 
this  place,  offers  you  worship. 

*  The  text  does  not  name  him.  The  Scholiast  calls  him  Vdma- 
deva :  but  nothing  further  is  said  of  him,  than  that  he  invoked 
the  aid  of  the  Aswins,  whilst  yet  in  his  mother's  womb. 


FIRST   ASHTA^A EIGHTH   ADHYATA.  323 

8.  You  repaired  to  him  who,  afflicted  by  the 
abandonment  of  his  own  father,  praised  you  from 
afar.^  Hence  your  prompt  and  wonderful  succours 
have  been  wished  to  be  at  hand,  (by  all). 

9.  That  honey-seeking  bee,  also,  murmured  your 
praise :  the  son  of  Usu  invokes  you  to  the  exhila- 
ration of  the  Soma  juice.  You  conciliated  the  mind 
of  Dadhyach  ;  so  that,  provided  with  the  head  of 
a  horse,  he  taught  you  (the  mystic  science). 

10.  As  WINS,  you  gave  to  Pedu  the  white  (horse), 
desired  by  many,  the  breaker-through  of  combatants, 
shining,  unconquerable  by  foes  in  battle,  fit  for 
every  work  ;  like  Indea,  the  conqueror  of  men. 

SUKTA    V.    (CXX.) 

The  deities  and  RisM  are  the  same,  except  that  the  last  stanza 
is  addressed  to  the  Eemedy  against  bad  dreams.  Of  the  thirteen 
stanzas  of  the  hymn,  the  first  nine  are  in  as  many  different 
metres ;  the  three  last  are  in  the  Gdyatri  measure. 

1.  What   praise   may   propitiate   you,   AswiNS  ?  Varga  xxii. 
Who  may  give  satisfaction  to  you  both  ?     How  may 

any  ignorant  (man)  pay  fitting  homage  ? 

2.  Thus  may  an  ignorant  man  inquire  the  means 
of  worshipping  the  all- wise;  for  every  (one,)  other 
(than  the  As  wins,)  is  unknowing.  They,  the  un- 
conquered,  quickly  (show  favour)  to  the  man  (who 
worships  them). 

^  This  refers,  it  is  said,  to  the  story  of  Bhujyu,  whom  his 
father,  Txigra^  had  abandoned,  or,  rather,  perhaps,  was  unable  to 
succour. 


324  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

3.  We  invoke  you,  who  know  all  things.  May 
you,  who  are  omniscient,  declare  to  us,  to-day,  the 
praise  that  is  acceptable.  Desirous  of  your  presence, 
I  reverence  you,  offering  (oblations). 

4.  I  invite  not  the  gods,  immature  (in  wisdom),* 
but  you,  Dasras.  Drink  of  the  wonderful  and 
strength-giving  burnt-offering,  and  make  us  vigor- 
ous. 

5.  (Powerful  is)  the  hymn  that  was  repeated  by 
the  son^  of  Ghosha,  and  by  Bhrigu,  and  with 
which  hymn  the  Angirasas  adore  you.  May  the 
sage  (KakshIvat),  desirous  (of  food),  obtain  it 
abundantly. 

Varga  XXIII.  6.  Hear  the  song  of  the  stumbling  (blind  man)  ;*= 
for,  verily,  As  wins,  I  glorify  you,  recovering  my 
eyes  (through  you),  who  are  protectors  of  good 
works. 

7.  You  have  been  givers  of  great  riches;  you 
have  again  caused  them  to  disappear.  Do  you,  who 
are  donors  of  dwellings,  become  our  preservers: 
protect  us  from  the  felonious  robber. 

8.  Deliver  us  not,  As  wins,  to  our  enemies :  never 
may  our  cows,  who  nourish  us  with  their  udders, 
stray  from  our  houses,  separated  from  their  calves. 

9.  Those  who  adore  you  obtain  (wealth),  for  the 
support  of  their   friends.     Direct   us   to    opulence 


*  Pdkyd,  '  to  be  ripened ;'  not  yet  mature  in  wisdom  (paktavya- 
prajndnunj. 

^  Who  is  called,  by  the  Scholiast,  SuJiasfi/a.  [See  X.,  XLI.,  3  ] 
''■  Rijrdkva.     (Seep.  317.) 


FIRST   ASHTAKA EIGHTS   ADHYAYA.  6zb 

bestowing  food  :  direct  iis  to  food  associated  with 
kine. 

10.  I  have  obtained,  without  horses,  the  car  of 
the  food-bestowing  Aswins,  and  expect  (to  gain),  by 
it,  much  (wealth). 

11.  This  (is  he  who  haB  obtained  thee),  wealth- 
bearing  (car).  Augment  (my  prosperity).  May  the 
delightful  car  bear  the  Soma-heyevsige  of  men  (to 
the-AswiNs). 

12.  IS'ow  am  I  disdainful  of  sleep,  and  of  the 
rich  man  who  benefits  not  others ;  for  both  (the 
morning  sleep  and  the  selfish  rich  man)  quickly 
perish. 


ANUVAKA    XYIII. 

SlJKTA    I.    (CXXI.) 

The  deities  are  the  Viswadevas,  or  Indra;  the  Kishi  is  KakshI vat  ; 

the  metre,  Trisht'iibh. 

1.  When  will  Indra,  the  protector  of  men,  and  Vaiga  xxiv, 
grantor  of  riches,  listen  to  the  praises,  thus  (recited), 

of  the  Angirasas,  who  are  devoted  to  the  gods? 
When  he  perceives  the  ministers  of  the  master  of 
the  mansion,  and  is  to  be  the  object  of  worship  in 
the  sacrifice,  he  greatly  exults. 

2.  He,  verily,  upholds  the  heaven  :  he,  the  bril- 
liant, the  leader  of  the  (stolen)  herd,  pours  forth  the 
flowing  (water),  for  the  sake  of  food :  the  mighty 
Indra   manifests   himself  after  his  own  daughter," 

■  Indra  is  here  identified  with  the  Sun. 


326  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA. 

(the  dawn) :  he  made  the  female  of  the  horse  un- 
naturally the  mother  of  the  cow.^ 

3.  May  he,  illuminating  the  purple  (dawn),  listen 
to  the  invocation  (addressed  to  him)  of  old,  daily 
bestowing  wealth  upon  the  race  of  Angiras.  He 
has  sharpened  his  fatal  shaft :  he  has  supported  the 
heaven,  for  the  good  of  men,  of  quadrupeds,  and 
bipeds. 

4.  In  the  exhilaration  of  this  Soma  juice,  you 
have  restored  the  celebrated  herd  of  cattle,  hidden 
(in  the  cave),  for  the  sake  of  sacrifice,  (to  the  An- 
GiRASAs).  When,  Indea,  the  threefold  crest ^  en- 
gages in  combat,  he  opens  the  doors  of  the  tyran- 
nical descendants  of  Manus  ;'' — 

5.  When  your  parents,  (heaven  and  earth),  the 
protectors  (of  the  world),  brought  the  nutritious 
and  invigorating  oblation  to  thee,  who  art  quick  in 
act,  and  when  they  offered  thee  the  pure  and  pre- 
cious milk  of  the  milch-cow.^ 

Varga  XXV.      6.  Now  is  Indea  manifested.     May  he,  the  over- 
comer  (of  his  foes),  grant  us  happiness, — he,  who 

*  Indra,  in  sport,  is  said  to  have  made  a  mare  bring  forth  a 
calf. 

''  Elevated,  as  a  triple  crest,  in  the  three  worlds. 

g  Pani,  the  stealer  of  the  cattle. 

^  That  is,  the  clarified  butter  of  the  oblations,  from  which  the 
nutriment  of  all  things  proceeds ;  for  the  oblation  ascends  to  the 
sun,  by  whom  rain  is  engendered,  from  which  springs  corn,  the 
support  of  living  beings.  When  this  has  been  done,  Indra  opens 
the  doors  of  the  cave,  and  rescues  the  cattle,  as  described  in  the 
preceding  verse,  with  which  this  is  connected. 


FIRST   ASHTAKA EIGHTH   ADHYAYA.  327 

shines  brightly,  like  the  sun  of  this  dawn.  May  the 
excellent  Soma,  being  sprinkled  upon  the  place  of 
sacrifice  with  a  ladle,  (exhilarate  us),  by  whom, 
presenting  the  oblations  we  had  prepared,  it  was 
imbibed. 

7.  When  the  bright-edged  hatchet "*  is  ready  for 
its  work,  the  directing  priest  is  able  to  have  the 
victim  bound  in  the  sacrifice."  When,  Indra,  j^ou 
shine  upon  the  days  that  are  appropriated  to  sacred 
rites,''  then  (success  attends)  upon  the  man  who 
goes,  with  his  cart,  (for  fuel),  the  driver  (of  cattle), 
or  the  active  (shepherd).'^ 

8.  Send  hither  thy  horses,  the  quafi'ers  of  the  ex- 


*  Vanadhili,  the  instrumeut  that  is  to  be  applied  to  the  forest, 
to  cut  down  the  trees. 

^  Pari  rodhand  goh.  The  phrase  is  rather  elliptical ;  and  there 
is  no  verb.  The  Scholiast  interprets  it,  paso  rodhandya  yupe 
niyojandya,  pari  smnartho  Ihavati, — the  priest,  the  adliwaryu,  is 
competent  for  the  attachment  of  the  animal  to  the  stake.  Or  the 
whole  passage  may  be  differently  rendered ;  vanadhiti  being  in- 
terpreted '  a  collection  of  water'  (^rana),  that  is,  a  body  of  clouds 
{meghamdld) :  when  this  is  ready  for  its  office  of  raining,  then 
Indra,  being  in  the  firmament,  is  able  to  remove  any  impediment 
to  the  shower ; — goh  being,  also,  rendered  '  water,'  or  '  rain.' 

°  Indra  being  the  same  with  the  Sun. 

''  The  phraseology  is,  here,  very  elliptical  and  obscure,  the  whole 
being  merely  ana/rvise  paiwishe  turdya,  being,  literally,  "  to  the 
carman,  to  the  cattle-driver,  to  the  quick,"  without  any  verb. 
The  Scholiast,  therefore,  supplies  the  connexion,  ahhimatamsidhyet, 
"his  wish  may  succeed,"  and  amplifies,  or  translates,  anarvise, 
'  carman,'  as  *'  he  who  goes  to  fetch  fuel  from  the  wood,  in  his 


328  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA. 

liilarating  libation  :  overcome,  warrior,  the  adversary 
plundering  us  of  our  treasure,  when  they  express, 
with  stones,  for  the  increase  (of  thy  strength),  the 
delightful,  exhilarating,  invigorating  (juice),  to  be 
overtaken  by  thee,  who  art  swifter  than  the  wind. 

9.  Thou  didst  hurl  thy  iron  bolt  upon  the  quick- 
moving  (Asura)j — the  swift  destroyer  of  foes,  that 
was  brought(to  you),  by  Ribhu,  from  heaven,'' — when 
thou,  who  art  worshipped  by  many,  striking  S'ushna, 
for  the  sake  of  Kutsa,  didst  encompass  him  with 
numberless  fatal  (weapons).^' 

10.  When  the  sun  (had  emerged)  from  the 
struggle  with  darkness,  thou  didst  break,   wielder 

^  of    the  thunderbolt,  the  cloud  that   had  been  his 

annoyance,  and  didst  sunder  the  well-fastened 
covering  in  which  S'ushna  had  enveloped  him. 
Vargaxxvi.  11.  Thou  the  vast,  powerful,  and  immoveable 
earth  and  heaven  animated  thee,  Indea,  to  glorious 
deeds ;  and  thou  didst  hurl  down,  into  the  waters, 
with  thy  mighty  thunderbolt,  the  everywhere- 
spreading  and  destroying  Yr-itra. 

cart;"  pasicishe,  the  driver  of  cattle;  and  turdya,  the  active,  or 
quick,  gopdla,  or  shepherd. 

*  Divah  *  upanitam  Rihhwd.  The  Scholiast  considers  the 
latter  to  be  the  same  as  Twasht'rd,  **by  TwasMriP  No  doubt, 
Twasht'ri  is,  most  usually,  considered  to  be  the  fabricator  of 
Indrah  thunderbolt ;  but  we  have  had  it  before  stated,  that  the 
thunderbolt  was  brought  to  Indra  by  Ribhu  (p.  285).     [?] 

"  This  is,  most  probably,  allegorical,  if  it  have  any  meaning  at 
all.  iS'ushla  is  '  drought;'  and  this,  Indra  removes,  for  the  benefit 
of  his  worshippers,  by  many  drops  of  rain. 


FIEST   ASHTAKA— EiaHTH    ADHYAYA.  329 

12.  Indra,  friend  of  man,  mount  the  horses 
whom  you  cherish,  who  are  fleet  as  the  wind,  are 
easily  yoked,  and  who  bear  (their  burthen)  well. 
You  have  sharpened  the  foe-destroying  thunderbolt, 
the  slayer  of  Vritra,  which  inspiring  (weapon) 
Us  ANAS,  the  son  of  Kavi,  gave''  you. 

13.  Stop,  SuEA,''  your  yellow  horses;  for  this 
Etasa,'  Indra,  drags  the  wheel.  Having  driven 
those  who  offer  no  sacrijS.ce,  to  the  opposite  bank 
of  the  ninety  rivers,'^  you  compel  them  (to  do)  what 
is  to  be  done. 

14.  IndrA;,  bearer  of  the  thunderbolt,  preserve 
us  from  this  (poverty)  that  is  so  difficult  to  be 
destroyed,  and  from  misfortune  in  war ;  grant  us 
riches,  conspicuous  for  chariots,  remarkable  for 
horses,  for  the  sake  of  food,  of  fame,  and  of  truth. 

15.  Famous  for  affluence,  Indra,  never  may  thy 
favour  be  withdrawn  from  us  :  may  food  ever  sustain 
us.  Opulent  Maghavan,  make  us  possessors  of 
cattle ;  and  may  we,  most  assiduous  in  thy  adoration, 
be  happy,  together  (with  our  families). 

"■  This  is  an  unusual  attribution  to  Usanas,  and  rather  incom- 
patible with  the  statement  of  its  having  been  the  gift  oi  Rihhu. 

^  Slira,  that  is,  Indra,  as  the  Sun. 

•=  Etasa  is  said  to  be  the  name  of  one  of  the  horses  of  the  Sun. 
The  word  occurs,  in  the  Aitarcija  Brdhnaria,  as  that  of  a  Rishi. 

^  Ndvydndm,  '  of  navigable  rivers,'  or  of  such  as  must  be  crossed 
by  a  boat. 


END    OF   THE-  FIRST   ASHTAKA. 


INDEX    OF    THE    SUKTAS. 


ASHTAKA  I.— MANDALA  I. 


ADHYAYA  I. 


Anuvaka  I. 

Fage. 

Siikta. 

Deity. 

Rishi. 

1. 

I. 

(I.) 

Agni, 

Madhuchchhandas, 

5. 

11. 

(II.) 

Vayu,  Indra  and  Vayij, 
MiTKA  and  Vartjna, 

The  same. 

8. 

III. 

(III.) 

AswiNS,  Indea,  Viswadevas, 
Saeaswati, 

Anuvaka  II. 

The  same. 

11. 

I. 

(IV.) 

Indea, 

The  same. 

13. 

II. 

(V.) 

The  same, 

The  same. 

15. 

III. 

(VI.) 

Indea,  Maeitts, 
Indea  and  Maeitts, 

The  same. 

18. 

IV. 

(VII.) 

Indea, 

Anuvaxa  III. 

The  same. 

20. 

I. 

(VIIT.) 

The  same. 

The  same. 

22. 

II. 

(IX.) 

The  same. 

The  same. 

24. 

III. 

(X.) 

The  same, 

The  same. 

27. 

IV. 

(XL) 

The  same. 

Jetei. 

332 


INDEX    OF    THE    SUKTAS. 


Anuvaka  IV. 

Fage. 

Sukta. 

Deity. 

Rishi. 

29. 

I. 

(XII.) 

Agni, 

Medhatithi, 

31. 

II. 

(XIII.) 

Apeis, 

The  same. 

34. 

III. 

(XIV.) 

ViSWADEVAS, 

The  same. 

36. 

IV. 

(XV.) 

ElTTJ,   &C., 

The  same. 

38. 

V. 

(XVI.) 

Indea, 

The  same. 

40. 

VI. 

(XVII.) 

Indea  and  Vaetjna, 

Anuvaka  Y. 

The  same. 

41. 

I. 

(XVIII.) 

Brahmanaspati,  &c., 

The  same. 

44. 

II. 

(XIX.) 

Agjti  and  Maeuts, 

The  same. 

ADHYAYA  II. 


46. 

III. 

(XX.) 

RiBHtrs, 

The  same 

49. 

IV. 

(XXI.) 

Indea  and  Agnt, 

The  same, 

50. 

V. 

(XXII.) 

ASWINS,  &c., 

The  same. 

54. 

VI. 

(XXIII.) 

Vatu,  &c., 

The  same, 

Anuvaka  YI. 


59. 

1. 

(XXIV.) 

Peajapati,  Agni,  &c., 

S'UNAHSEPA. 

64. 

11. 

(XXV.) 

Vaetjna, 

The  same. 

67. 

III. 

(XXVI.) 

Agni, 

The  same. 

09. 

IV. 

(XXVII.) 

AgNI,    ViSWADEVAS, 

The  same. 

71. 

V. 

(XXVIII.) 

Indka,  &c.. 

The  same. 

73. 

VI. 

(XXIX.) 

Indea, 

The  same. 

75. 

VII. 

(XXX.) 

Indea,  &c., 

Anuvaka  YII. 

The  same. 

79. 

I. 

(XXXI.) 

Agni, 

HlEANfTASTUPA 

84. 

II. 

(XXXII.) 

Indha, 

The  same. 

INDEX    OF   THE    SUKTAS. 


333 


ADHYATA  III. 


Page. 

Biilita. 

Baity. 

Rishi. 

89. 

III. 

(XXXIII.) 

Indea, 

Hieantastt^pa 

94. 

IV. 

(XXXIV.) 

AsWINS, 

The  same. 

97. 

V. 

(XXXV.) 

Satitei,  &c., 
Anuvaka  YIII. 

The  same. 

100. 

I. 

(XXXVI.) 

Agni, 

Kanwa. 

104. 

II. 

(XXXVII.) 

Maetjts, 

The  same. 

107. 

III. 

(XXXVIII.)             The  same, 

The  same. 

109. 

IV. 

(XXXIX.) 

The  same, 

The  same. 

111. 

V. 

(XL.) 

Beahmanaspati, 

The  same. 

113. 

VI. 

(XLI.) 

Vaeuna,  Mitea,  Aeyaman, 
Adtttas, 

The  same. 

115. 

VII. 

(XLII.) 

Pushan, 

The  same. 

117. 

VIII. 

(XLIII.)     Rtjdra,  Mitra  and  Vaeuna, 

Soma, 

The  same. 

Antjvaxa  IX. 

118. 

I. 

(XLIV.) 

Agxi,  &c., 

Peaskanwa. 

121. 

II. 

(XLV.) 

The  same, 

The  same. 

123. 

III. 

(XLVI.) 

As  WINS, 

The  same. 

ADHYAYA  IV. 


126. 

IV. 

(XLVII.) 

The  same,*^ 

The  same. 

128. 

V. 

(XLVIII.) 

USHAS, 

The  same. 

131. 

VI. 

(XLIX.) 

The  same. 

The  same. 

131. 

VII. 

(L.) 

SuEYA, 

Anuvaka  X. 

The  same. 

135. 

I. 

(LI.) 

Indka, 

Savta. 

140. 

II. 

(LIL) 

The  same, 

The  same. 

145. 

III. 

(MIL) 

The  same, 

The  same, 

o  o  ^ 


INDEX   or   THE    SUKTAS. 


Fage. 

Siikta. 

Deity. 

Rishi. 

148. 

IV. 

(LIV.) 

Indea, 

Satta. 

150. 

V. 

(LV.) 

The  same, 

The  same, 

152. 

YI. 

(LVI.) 

Hie  same, 

The  same, 

153. 

YII. 

(LVII.) 

The  same, 

Anuvaka  XI. 

The  same. 

155. 

I. 

(LVIII.) 

Agni, 

NODHAS. 

157. 

II. 

(LIX.) 

Agni  Vaiswanaka, 

The  same. 

160. 

III. 

(LX.) 

Agni, 

The  same. 

162. 

IV. 

(LXI.) 

Indra, 

The  same. 

166. 

V. 

(LXII.) 

170. 

VI. 

(LXIII.) 

173. 

VII. 

(LXIV.) 

177. 

I. 

(LXV.) 

179. 

II. 

(LXVI.) 

181. 

III. 

(LXVII.) 

182. 

IV. 

(LXVIII.) 

183. 

V. 

(LXIX.) 

185. 

VI. 

(LXX.) 

187. 

VII. 

(LXXI.) 

190. 

VIII. 

(LXXII.) 

194.     IX.       (LXXIII.) 


ADHYAYA  V. 

The  same. 

The  same, 

Maetjts, 

Anuvaka  XII. 

Agni, 
The  same, 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same, 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same, 
The  same, 

Anuvaka  XIII. 


The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 


Parasaea. 

The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 


197.  I.  (LXXIV.) 

198.  II.  (LXXV.) 

198.  III.  (LXX  VI.) 

199.  IV.  (LXXVII.) 


Agni, 

GOTAMA. 

The  same, 

The  same. 

The  same, 

The  same. 

The  same, 

The  same. 

INDEX    OF   THE    SUKTAS. 


335 


Fage. 

Sukta. 

Deity. 

Rishi. 

201. 

V. 

(LXXYIII.) 

Agni, 

GOTAMA. 

202. 

yi. 

(LXXIX.) 

The  same, 

The  same. 

204. 

VII. 

(LXXX.) 

Indka, 

The  same. 

ADHYAYA  YI. 


207. 

VIII. 

(LXXXI.) 

The  same, 

The  same. 

209. 

IX. 

(LXXXII.) 

The«same, 

The  same. 

211. 

X. 

(LXXXIII.) 

The  same, 

The  same. 

213. 

XI. 

(LXXXI  V.) 

The  same. 

The  same. 

Anuvaka  XIY. 

219. 

I. 

(LXXXV.) 

Maexjts, 

The  same, 

222. 

II. 

(LXXXVI.) 

The  same. 

The  same. 

223. 

III. 

(LXXXVII.) 

The  same. 

The  same. 

225. 

IV. 

(LXXXVIII.) 

The  same, 

The  same, 

227. 

V. 

(LXXXIX.) 

ViSWADEVAS,      • 

The  same. 

230. 

VI. 

(XC.) 

The  same. 

The  same. 

232. 

VII. 

(XCI.) 

Soma, 

The  same. 

235. 

VIII. 

(XCII.) 

USHAS,    AsWINS, 

The  same. 

240. 

IX. 

(XCIII.) 

Agni  and  Soma, 

The  same. 

242.     I. 


Anuvaka  XY. 
(XCIV.)  Agni,  &c.. 


IVITTSA. 


ADHYAYA  YII. 


246. 

II. 

(XCV.) 

Agni, 

The  same. 

250. 

III. 

(XCVI.) 

The  same. 

The  same. 

253. 

IV. 

(XCVII.) 

The  same, 

The  same. 

254. 

V. 

(XCVIII.) 

The  same. 

The  same. 

255. 

Vl. 

(XCIX.) 

The  same. 

Kastapa. 

255. 

VII. 

(C.) 

Indra, 

Varshagiras. 

136 


INDEX   OF   THE    SUKTAS. 


Page. 

SuJcta. 

Deity. 

Rishi. 

260. 

VIII.  (CI.) 

Indra, 

Ktjtsa. 

263. 

IX.     (CII.) 

The  same, 

The  same. 

265. 

X.       (CIII.) 

The  same, 

The  same, 

267. 

XI.     (CIV.) 

The  same, 

The  same, 

269. 

XII.  (CV.) 

ViSWADEVAS, 

The  same. 

Anuvaka  XVI. 


275. 

I, 

(CVI.) 

ViSWADEVAS, 

The  same. 

277. 

II. 

(CVII.) 

The  same, 

The  same. 

278. 

III. 

(CVI  II.) 

Indea  and  Agni, 

The  same. 

280. 

IV. 

(CIX.) 

The  same. 

The  same. 

283. 

V. 

(CX.) 

ElBHUS, 

The  same. 

286. 

VI. 

(CXI.) 

The  same, 

The  same. 

287. 

VII. 

(CXII.) 

Earth  and  Sky,  Agni, 

AsWINS, 

The  same, 

ADHYAYA  YIII. 


296. 

VIII. 

(CXIII.) 

Ushas,  &c., 

The  same. 

300. 

IX. 

(CXIV.) 

EUDEA, 

The  same. 

304. 

X. 

(CXV.) 

SuEYA, 

Anuvaka  XYII, 

The  same. 

306. 

I. 

(CXVI.) 

AswiNS, 

Kakshi'vat, 

314. 

11. 

(CXVII.) 

The  same. 

The  same. 

319. 

III. 

(CXVIII.) 

The  same, 

The  same. 

321. 

IV. 

(CXIX.) 

The  same. 

The  same. 

323. 

V. 

(CXX.) 

Aswrsrs,  &c., 

The  same. 

325.      1. 


Anuvaka  XYIII. 

(CXXI.)  Indka, 


The  same. 


INDEX  OP   NAMES. 


Adhrigu,  294 

Adhwanju,  18,  101,  244 

Acliti,  55,  61,  63,  64,  66, 

113,  117,  193,  227, 

230,  243,  246,  250, 

252,  255,  260,  263, 

265,  267,  275,  277, 

280,  283,  286,  287, 

296,  300,  304,  305 

A'di/1/a,  134,  187 

Adityas,  7,  33,  34,  48, 
52,  55,  62,  68,  97, 
113,  114,  115,  120, 
121,  123,  135,  193, 
194,  217,  227,  243, 
277 

Adityaloha,  35 

Adityamandala,  17 

Agastya,  291,  311,  316 

Agndy'i,  52 

Agni,  1,  5,  29,  30,  31, 
"32,  33,  34,  35,  36,  37, 
38,  41,  42,  43,  44,45, 
49,  50,  51,  52,  54,  58, 
59,  61,  07,  68,  69,  70, 
71,  79,  80,81,  82,  83, 
84,  97,  100,  101,  102, 
103,  104,  108,  111, 
112,  118,  119,  120, 
121,  122,  li3,  137, 
141,  142,  155,  156, 
157,  158,  159,  160, 
161,  177,  178,  179, 
180,  181,  182,  183, 
184,  185,  186,  187, 
188,    189,    190,    191, 


192, 

193, 

194, 

195, 

196, 

197, 

198, 

199, 

200, 

201, 

202, 

203, 

204, 

220, 

229, 

240, 

241, 

242, 

243, 

244, 

245, 

246, 

247, 

248, 

249, 

250, 

251, 

252, 

253, 

254, 

255, 

271, 

272, 

273, 

274, 

275, 

276, 

277, 

278, 

279, 

280, 

281, 

282, 

283, 

287, 

288, 

290, 

295, 

301,    304 

Agni  and  Soma,  240,  241, 
242 

Agnichayana,  191 

Agn'idhnya,  3 

Agnisht'oma,  38,  48,  112, 
192 

Agnishwdltas,  276 

Agnyddheya,  48, 186, 192 

Ahavamya,  3,  30,  31,  37, 
80,  120 

AM,  85,  86,  87,88,  136, 
137,  144,  104,  204, 
206,  266,  267 

Aitihdsikas,  228 

Afigarta,  59,  60 

Amlar'isha,  59,  259 

Angiras,  3,  34,  46,  79, 
84,  91,  122,  135,  136, 
166,  168,  197,  201, 
242,  256,  260,  261, 
283,    294,  326 


Angirasas,  4,  17,  79, 
136,  140,  167,  168, 
187,  193,  198,  212, 
256,  "261,  277,  308, 
324,  325,  326 

Anhu,  111 

Anjas'i,  268 

Antaha,  289 

Antariksha,   17,    52,  56, 

98,  245 
Antarikshahha,  18 
Anus,  279 
Anuydjas,  122 
A  pah,  57 
Ai)una,  240 
Apris,  31,  .122 
Aptyas,  142,  272 
Arhuda,  137 
Archatka,  313 
An'sht'a,  188 
Arisht'aiU'ini,  229 
Arjih'tyd,  88 
Arjuna,  295 
Arlca,  18 
Arhn,  18,  24 
Aniria,  229 

An/a»ia)i,  68,  100,  112, 
il3,  114,  121,  203, 
227,  228,  230,  231, 
233,  271,  272,  277 

A'fi/as,  90,  137,  138, 
266,  318 

2G 


338 


INDEX    OF    NAMES. 


Asihi'i,  88  I 

Asridh,  227 

Asses  of  the  Aswins,  96, 
306 

Asura,  64 

Asuras,  85,  137,  142, 
147,  148,  151,  158, 
163,  164,  213,  220, 
292,  301,  319,  328 

A  sun  may  a,  216 

Asiva,  291 

Asicms,  8,  38,  47,  50, 
51,  75,  78,94,95,96, 
97,118,  119,  120,121, 
123,  124,  125,  126, 
127,  139,  143,  227, 
228,  235,  239,  286, 
287,  288,  289,  290, 
291,  292,  293,  294, 
295,  296,  306,  307, 
308,  309,  310,  311, 
312,  313,  314,  315, 
816,  317,  318,  319, 
320,  321,  322,  323, 
324,    325 

Atharvan,  5,  207,  212, 
216,  310,  318 

Atithigiva,  137,  147,292 

Atri,  122,  136,290,293, 
308,  314,  320,  322 

AtyagnisMoma,  192 

Au2)dsana,  192 

Aya,  268 

Ayu,  147,  251 

Ayus,  81,  147 


Bda,  28,  141,  142,  193 

Bali,  42,   53 

Barhis,  9,  32 

Bhaga,  34,  59,  120,  227, 
231 

Bhdg'irath'i,  88 


Bharcdwdja,    159,     292, 

315 
Bharata,  52 
Bhdrat'i,  31,  33,  52 
Bliayamdna,  259 
Bhrigii,   139,    160,   188, 

213,    241,    293,    308, 

324 

Bhrigus,  156,  160 

BJmjyu,  289,  294,  306, 
307,  316,  322 

Brahma,  33,  60,  101, 
244,  261 

Brahman,  24,  37,  261, 
279 

Brahmanaspati,  41,  42, 
43,  108,  111,  112,  113 

Brihadratha,  1 04 

Brihaspati,  34,  48,  95, 
'117,  167,  231,  244, 
274,  276 

Brihat,  18,  144 

Brisaya,  240 

Budha,  80 

Chalcshu,  88 
Chdpa,  294 
Chitrahhdnu,  70 
Chyavana,  139,293,308, 
309,  320 

Chyavdna,  308,  316,  320 

Classes  of  heings,  20,  230, 
314 

Cows,  17,  165 

Cows  of  Ushas,  131 

Dalhiti,  295 
Dadh'icha,  216,310 
Dadh'ichi,  207,  216 
Badhyach,  207,  216,  310, 
318,  323 


Bahsha,  34,  227 

DaJcshind,  41,  43 

Bdhshma,  37 

Bdnavas,  87,  136,  147, 
159 

Danu,  87,  136,  147 

Bdnu,  87 

Barsa,  192 

Basadyu,  93 

Basras,  8,  78,  308,  311, 

314,    318,    320,    322, 

324 

Baxyus,  90,  137,  138, 
171,  201,  259,  261, 
266,  268,  314,  318 

Bevardta,  60  ' 

Bhishaiid,  52 

Dhrishnu,  77 

Bhwasanti,  295 

Birghasravas,  291 

Birghatamas,  42, 143,291 

Biti,  302 

Div,  246 

Bivoddsa,  127,  137,  292, 
312,  322 

Doors,  32 

Bravinodd,  250,251,252 

Bravinodas,  37,  38 
Druhyus,  279 
Bwita,  141,  142 
Byudevatd,  78 
Byuloha,  17 


Earth,  228,  287 
Ehimdydsah,  10 
^Ma,  141,  142 
^^fl*'«,  149,  166,  329 
Evaydvan,  231 


INDEX    OF    NAMES. 


339 


Gddhi,  27 

Gaiicialc't,  88 

Gandharvas,  52,  230 

Gangd,  88,  96,  168 

Gdrhapatya,  3,  31,  37,  80 

Garuda,  229 

Garutman,  229 

Gdthin  (name),  27 

G a  thin,  18 

Gayasiras,  53 

Gayatr'i,  164,  205,  241 

Gdyatrin,  24 

G'Aorff.,  100 

Ghoshd,  315,  318,  324 

Goddesses,  33,  52,  164 

Gomat'i,  88 

Gopd,  54 

Gotama,  155,  161,  166, 
170,  173,  197,  201, 
202,  204,  208,  219, 
221,  226,  227,  232, 
235,    237,    240,    308 

Grdvastut,  37 

jB(</-«,  247 

Haridrava,  134 

Harischandra,  59,  60,  71, 
73 

Haritdla,  134 

Haviryajnas,  192 

Havyavdh,  181 

Heaven,  228 

Simavat,  140 

Hiraiiyagarhha,  44,  227 

Hirahjahasla,  310,  319 

Hiranyastupa,  79,  89 

Hlddin'i,  88 

^oma.,  192 

Horses  of  Indra,  16 


Horses   of  the    Sun,   98, 
133 

iZoifro,  52 

^o!!n,  2,   22,    101,   112, 
199,  244 

/</«,  82 

/^a,  31,  33,  82,  112 

/^a,  82,  122 

/'/^■^l(^,  32 

/rtr7ra,5,6,  8,9, 11,12,13 
14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19 
20,  21,  22,  23,  24,  25 
26,  27,  28,  29,  34,  35 
36,  37,  38,39,  40,  41 
42,  43,  46,  47,  48,  49 
50,  54,  55,  56,  58,  59 
68,  71,  72,  73,  74,  75 
76,  77,  84,  85,  86,  87 
88,  89,  90,  91,  92,  93 
2,  118 
138 
142 
146 
150 
154 
162 
166 
170 
180 
199 
207 
211 
215 
219 
229 
255 
260 
264 
268 
277 
281 
286 
309 
321 
327 


95, 

102,111,11; 

135 

,  136, 

137, 

139 

,  140, 

141, 

143 

144, 

145, 

147 

,  148, 

149, 

151 

152, 

153, 

157 

,  158, 

159, 

163 

164, 

165, 

167 

168, 

169, 

171 

172, 

175, 

191 

193, 

197, 

204 

205, 

206, 

208 

209, 

210, 

212 

213, 

214, 

216 

217, 

218, 

220 

225, 

228, 

231 

232, 

241, 

256 

257, 

259, 

261 

262, 

263, 

265 

266, 

267, 

269 

272, 

275, 

278 

279, 

280, 

282 

283, 

285, 

292 

294, 

295, 

310 

313, 

318, 

323 

325, 

326, 

328 

329 

InArdni,  52 
Irdvat'i,  88 

IsMratha,  27 

Jahndvi,  312 
Jahnu,  312 
Jdhusha,  312,  317 
Jamhunad'i,  88 
Jardhodha,  70 
Jdtavedas,  255 
Jaundice,  134 
Jeiri,  27 
Jivdldjihwa,  203 

Ka,  60,  123,  217 

Kahsh'ivat,  42,  139,  288, 
289,  291,  306,  308, 
315,  324,  325 

Kali,  292,  293 

Kanica,  29,  54,  100,  102, 

103,  104,   no,  HI, 

113,  118,  122,  127, 
128,  289,  291,  315, 
320 

Kanwas,  34,  104,  106, 
120,  125,  126,  127, 
131 

Kapardin,  301 
Karanja,  147 
Karkandhu,  289 
Kasyapa,   87,   113,  225, 

229,  255 
Kaush'itakins,  137 
Kavi,  29,  316,  329 
Kdvya,  213,  316 
Kavyavdh,  181 
Khela,  291,  311 
Krisdmi,  295 
Krishna,  260,  313,  315 


340 


INDEX    OF   NAMES. 


Kulisi,  268 
Kuruhshetra,  216 
Kurus,  208 
Kusiica,  27 

172,  242,  246,  253, 

260,  269,  275,  276, 

277,  278,  283,  287, 

291,  295,  296,  300, 

304,  328 

Kuyava,  267,  268 

Madlimidyd,  216 

Madhuchchhandas,  1, 5, 27 

Maghavan,  85,  88,  93, 
144,  148,  154,  157, 
209,  210,  218,  263, 
264,  265,  26G,  268, 
^■.29 

Mahdndmm,  62 

Mahi,  33 

Maitrdvarima,  244 

Mandhdtri,  292 

Mdndhdtri,  93,  292,  295 

Mantra,  18 

Maim,  80,  82,  83,  84, 
102,  104,  112,  121, 
122,  139,  158,  183, 
251,  276,  293,  294, 
301,    318 

Mamis,  68,  82,  84,  120, 
125,  161,  193,  199, 
207,  273,  274,  326 

Ma7%us  {the),  251 

Manusha,  318 

Mar'ichi,  255 

Mdrjdliya,  3 

MartidvrtdJid,  88 

Marufs,  15,  16,  17,  25, 
34,  36,  44,  45,  48,  54, 
55,  56,  79,  90,  104, 
105,    lOG,    107,    108, 


109,  110,  111,  112, 
121,  133,  135,  141, 
144,  145,  14H,  173, 
174,  175,  176,  185, 
190,  191,  202,  203, 
206,  218,  219,  220, 
221,  222,  223,  224, 
225,  226,  228,  231, 
245,  256,  257,  258, 
259,  260,  261,  262, 
263,  267,  275,  277, 
287,  301,  302,  303, 
308 
Matariswan,  160,  188 
Mdtris,  57 
MedhdtWd,   29,  54,   58, 

135,  168 
Medhjdtithi,  102 
Mend,  139,  140 
Mitra,   5,   7,  34,  36,  37, 
54,    55,    65,    68,    97, 
100,    108,    112,    113, 
114,    117,    120,    121, 
184,    189,    198,    203, 
227,    230,    231,    233, 
245,    246,    250,    252, 
255,    260,    263,    265, 
267,    275,    277,    2^0, 
283,    286,    287,    296, 
300,    304,    305 

Mortar,  72 


JVahusJta,  81,  84 

Nalcshatras,  132 

Nalda,  32 

Nalini,  88 

Namuchi,  147 

Kara,  7 

Nardsansa,  32,  41,  43 

Nary  a,  149,  291 

Ndsatyas,  47,  96,  97, 
124,  127,  306,  307, 
308,    309,    310,    312, 


313,    314,    315,    316, 

319,    320,    321 
Navavdstwa,  104 
Neshtri,  36,  38,  101 
Night,  97,  296 
Nirriti,  62,  107 
Nodhas,  155,   157,    162, 

165,    166,    170,    173, 

Nrishad,  315 
Nyokas,  24 

Ocean,  246 

Fqjra,  308,  315,  316 
Fajras,  140,  308 
Pdkayajms,  48,  192 
Pani,  87,  136,  187,212, 
240,  326 

PaJiis,  17,  28 
Pdjjadevatd,  62 
Pardsara,  177 
Pardq-iJ,  290 
Parnaya,  147 
Parushi'i,  88 
Paiharvan,  293 
Pdvaha,  30 
Pdvan'i,  88 
PefZt^,  307,  315,  321,322, 

323 
Pestle,  72 
Pijavana,  127,  294 
Pipru,  137,  261,  267 
Pitris,  140,  230,  27(5 
Piyacana  (?),  294 
Plakshagd,  88 
Potri,  101,  199,  244 
Prachctasas,  110 
Prdiia,  210 
Prasdalri,  214 


INDEX    OF    NAMES. 


341 


Prasitra,  .ol 

Praju'pati,  59,  60,  61,  97, 
122,  123,  217,  218, 
306 

Prashamva,  118,  120, 
121,  122,  126,  131, 
134 

Praijdjas,  122 

Priests,  17,  37,  101,  167 

Prishat'ih,  110,  175 

Prisni,  56,  105,  107, 
219,  229 

Prisnigu,  290 

Prisnimutarah,  bd,  107 

Prim,  292,  293 

Prithiv'i,  17,  246,  303 

Prithiv'iloha,  18 

PrithuSravas,  313 

Priijamedha,  122 

Priyavrata,  122 

Purnamdsa,  192 

Purohita,  244 

Piiruhifsa,  93,  172,  290, 
292,  295 

Purumitra,  294,  318 

Purun'itha,  160 

Pururavas,  80,  81 

Pnnw,  279 

Piirushanti,  295 

Pushd,  115 

Piishan,  34,  54,  56,  57, 
115,  116,  229,  231, 
276 


^2<ffl?7,  310 

Pahugana,  197,201,208 

Pakshasas  or  Rdkshasas, 
60,  91,  100,  107,  199, 
203,204,223,230,298 


72«/w  [hidra),    135,    140 

Rathasthd,  88 

Rathantara,  167 

Rauliina,  266 

7?^Mrt5,  289,  313,  314, 
316,  320,  322 

/?«^<;i«<,  46,  48,  285,  287, 
328,  329 

Ribhus,  45,  46,  47,  48, 
49,  135,  171,  191, 
283,  284,  285,  286, 
287 

Rihhukshan,  286 

i2zV^,  14,  18,  24 

Richatka,  313 

Richika,  59 

Rijlshin,  223 

Rij'iswan,  137,  147,  260 

Rijrdswa,  259,  290,  311, 
■   317,  324 

Rishis  (seven),  163 

Riiasfuhh,  294 

E«Ym,  36,  37,  38 

i??YMS,  38,  218 

^/rers,  88,  89,  168,  189, 
268 

Rohita,  59,  60 

Rohits,  36 

i2?<fZ/-rt,  70,  108,  109, 

117,  173,  175,  191, 

219,  300,  301,  302, 
303 

Rudras,  8,  97,  110,  121, 
123,  155,  162,  174, 
256,  262 

Rudrdsah,  109 


Sachipati,  277 
Sad^saspat i ,  41,  43 
Sadasya,  206 


Sahadeca,  259 

Saharakshas,  181 

Sahasasjjutra,  111 

Saluisrdksha,  55,  204 

-S«/&m,  26,  135,  148,  269 

Sakti,  177 

Sdnian,  14,  18,  24,  144, 
167 

Samdroham,  53 

Samba,  134 

Sambara,  137,  148,  149, 
159,  260,  261,  267, 
292 

Samitri,  206 

Sanakas,  90 

Santya,  38 

Sanyu,  95,  117 

i«r«,  313 

Saramd,  17,  167,   193 

Saraswat'i,  8,  10,  31,  33, 
88,  111,  227 

Sarayu,  88 
Saryandvat,  216 

Sdrydta,  139,  293 

Sarydta,  293 

Sarydti,  139,  293,  308, 
309 

i^s^m,  6,  21,  22 

Satakratu,  12,  13,  14, 
24,  39,  76,  77,  271, 
295 

Satavani,  160 

Sdtmaneya,  160 

Satwdnah,  173 

(SflSi^c/ijla,  10 

Savitri,  50,  51,  59,  61, 
97,'  98,  99,  100,  103 
120,  272,  277,  284 

Savya,    135 


342 


INDEX    OF    NAMES. 


Saiju,  288,  293,  313,318, 
320,  322 

Simyus,  259 

Sindhu,  88,  246,  287 

Sindhumdtard,  124 

Siphd,  268 

S'ltd,  88 

Siva,  117,  173,  301,  302 

Soma,  6,  35,  37,  38,  39, 
41,  42,  43,  58,  94, 
117,  118,  178,  180, 
227,  232,  233,  234, 
235,  240,  241,  242, 
311 

Somapds,  122 

Somajpdlas,  295 

SornajMti,  199 

Somaydgas,  101 

Somayajnas,  192 

Srinjayas,  208 

Srona,  290 

Sriitarya,  291 

Stoma,  14,  21,  22 

Stuti,  22 

Suchanti,  290 

Sudds,  127,  172,  294 

Suddsa,  127,  294 

Sudhanwan,  46,  49,  283, 
284,  285 

Suhastya,  324 

Suhanyd,  308,  309 

Suhratu,  139 

Sunohsepa,  59,  60,  61, 
63,  64,  67,  71,  73,  75, 
78 

S'anahscpha,  59,  00 

Suparna,  99 

Surddhas,  259 

/SMr(5f,  329 


/S?in/f?,  51,  54,  99,  118, 
li31,  132,  133,  134, 
159,  106,  247,  261, 
304,  311,  320 

Siiryd,  311,  312,  321 

Susamiddha,  31 

Stishna,  29,  137,  139, 
153,  171,  261,  267, 
328 

Sushomd,  88 

Sushumna,  217 

Susipra,  22 

Susravas,  147 

Sutudr'i,  88 

Swadhd,  140 

Swdhd,  31,  34 

Swaitreya,  93 

Swarga,  23,  35,  54,  132, 
216,  241,  245,  251 

Swarlolca,  273 

Swaswa,  166 

Switrd,  93 

Sivitrya,  93 

/Syaw,  98,  315,  319 

Syiimaraimi,  293 


Tanunapdt,  31 

Tdrhhya,  229 

Traitana,  142,  143 

IVasadasyu,  292 

TriJcsha,  229 

Trisiras,  88 

Tn'soka,  291 

^hVff,  141,  142,  269, 
270,  272,  273,  274, 
275,  276 

Tricikraina,  53 

rM<7r<?)  289,  306,  316, 
317,  320,  323 


Turvasa,  103,  104,  149 

Turvasas,  279 

Turvasu,  104,  149 

Turvaydnaf  147 

2^Mrvi^?,  104,  149,  165, 
295 

Twasht'ri,  31,  33,  36,  48, 
51,  85,  88,  143,  163, 
207,  217,  221,  240, 
310,  318,  328 

Udgdtri,  18,  24,  101 

Ugradeva,  104 

Z7/.7;/i<?,  6,  14,  21 

C7i;%fl!,  38 

Upaydjas,  122 

U'rjdm,  321 

Z7sffw«s,  29,  138,  213, 
316,  329 

^sA«s,  32,   75,  78,  119, 

120,  121,  123,  125, 

128,  129,  130,  131, 

154,  202,  235,  236, 

237,  238,  239,  296, 

297,  298,  299,  300, 
304 

Ushasas,  128,  231,  299, 
300 

Usij,^2,  291,306,323 

Vdch,  52 

Vadhrimati,  310,  319 

Vdgdevatd,  111 

Vdgdevi,  52 

Vahni,  160 

Vaistvadtra,  192 

Vaiswdnara,  157,  158, 
159,  254,  255 

Foytf,  46,  48,  287 

Vdjas,  287 

Vdmadem,  322 


INDEX    OF    NAMES. 


343 


Vdmana,  54 

Vamra,  138,  292,  293 

Vanaspati,^i,Z2,,  72,231 

Vandana,  289,  309,  314, 
320,  322 

Vangrida,  147 
Vdri'i,  18 

Vardha,  163,  302 
Vdrshdgiras,    255,    257, 
259 

Varuna,  5,  7,  37,  40,  41, 
50,54,  55,  59,  60,  61, 
62,  63,  64,  65,  66,  67, 
68,  97,  100,  112,  113, 
114,  117,  121,  184, 
189,  198,  203,  227, 
228,  230,  231,  232, 
245,  246,  250,  252, 
255,  260,  261,  263, 
265,  267,  271,  272, 
274,  275,  277,  280, 
283,  286,  287,  296, 
300,    304,    305 

Varundni,  52 
Variitri,  52 
Vasa,  291,  313 
Vashat'kdra,  97 
VasisMha,  177,  290,  291 
Vasu,  25,  80 
Vasus,  97,  121,  123,  155 
Vaswokasdrd,  88 


Vm/u,  5,  6,  34,35,  54,  55, 
79,159,  188,225,241, 
288 

Voyya,  149,  289 

Vedhas,  190 

Vend,  94 

rihku,  46,  48,  287 

Vikhanas,  293 

Viniada,  136,  294,  306, 
318 

Vtpds,  88 

Virapatn'i,  268 

Virupa,  122 

Vishidpu,  313,  315 

Vishnu,  33,  50,  53,  54, 
163,  220,  231 

Vishnupada,  53 

Vishwdch,  317 

Vispald,  291,  311,  316, 
320 

Vispati,  29 

Viswadevas,  8,  9,  34,  48, 
54,  69,  71,  73,  227, 
269,  275,  277,  325 

Viiwaka,  313,  315 

Visicaharman,  33 

Vikvdmitra,  1,  27,59,60 

Viswdvasu,  180 

Vitastd,  88 

Vrichayd,  139 


Vrishdgir,  255,  311 

Vrishanaswa,  139,  140 

FrzYra,  17,  19,  56,  85, 
86,  87,  88,  89,  90,  91, 
92,  102,  136,  140,141, 
142,  143,  144,  145, 
146,  150,  153,  154, 
158,  163,  164,  165, 
170,  171,  197,  201, 
205,  206,  207,  214, 
221,  233,  240,  241, 
260,  266,  267,  278, 
282,    310,    328,    329 

Vritras,  12,  216 

Vgusht'a,  78 


Yadu,  104,  149 

Yadus,  279 

Yajamdna,  3 

Yajnas,  48,  122,  192 

Yaj'us,  18 

Yama,  74,  98,  107,  179, 
180,  306 

Yamaduti,  74 

Yamaloka,  98 

Yamund,  88 

Ydtiidhdnas,  100 

Yai/dti,    84,     104,    149, 
279 


POSTSCEIPT. 


This  volume,  as  now  printed,  will  be  seen  to  differ 
but  very  immaterially  from  the  original  impression. 
Beyond  the  correction  of  oversights  in  quoting,  tran- 
scribing, and  press-reading,  very  little  indeed  has 
here  been  attempted. 

On  reference  to  the  Translator's  manuscript,  I  found 
justification  for  changing,  at  p.  87,  line  17,  "slept  a 
long  darkness"  into  "  slept  through  a  long  darkness." 
The  same  authority,  fortified  by  the  Sanskrit,  shows, 
that,  in  p.  248,  notes,  line  1,  the  term  "  act'*  of  the 
first  edition  should  have  been  "air,"  now  substituted 
therefor.  M.  Langlois — see  p.  141,  note,  1.  6, — was 
formerly  quoted  as  writing  "  ou  libation  qui  iiorte  le 
nom  de  Trita  ;''''  Dr.  Eosen — see  p.  255,  notes,  1.  1, — 
was  adduced  for  the  Avords  ^''  fac  nos  opulentos^'' 
though  he  wrote  "  divitiw  nos  opuUntos  seqimntor ; 
and,  at  p.  223,  notes,  1.  9, — which  see, — we  were  told, 
that  "  Eosen  has  lance  sacrificiis  cuUi;  M.  Langlois, 
amis  de  nos  sacrifices.^''  It  will  sufiice  to  have  thus 
intimated  several  categories  of  improvements  which 
have  been  introduced  in  the  foregoing  pages. 

Of  proper  names  and  their  derivatives  the  following 
misspellings,  most  of  Avhicli  occurred  uniformly,  have 
been    rectified:    Anhas,  Architka,   Chandogya,  Dlia- 


346  POSTSCRIPT. 

bliiti,  Gliritsamada,  Kausitaki,  Madliuclihanclas,  Ma- 
ghavan,  Magliavat,  Panin,  Priyamedlias,  Riblnikshin, 
Richitka,  S'akapuriii,  Stliulash'tivin,  Suliasti,  S'unah- 
sepas,  Vasisli'tha,  Yiswanch,  &c.  &c.  From  the  In- 
troduction to  III.,  XXXI.— see  Vol.  III.,  p.  42,— it 
appears  that  Kur^ika  ^^as  of  the  family  of  Ishiratha, 
not  Ishirathi.  Yala  and  Yrffiaspati  have  here  given 
pkce  to  Bala  and  Brihaspati,  which  the  Translator, 
correctly,  came,  at  last,  to  prefer.  The  Yaidik  forms 
have,  also,  been  restored,  Avhere  he  adopted  the 
Paurahik,  as  in  the  cases  of  Chyavana,  Manus,  and 
Mandhatri.  Dadhyanch  has,  further,  been  altered  to 
Dadliyach.  In  commenting  on  Ndrshada,  Sayaiia,  as 
printed, — Yol.  I.,  pp.  940,  941, — twice  exhibits  the 
equivalent  of  "  son  of  Nrishada,"  the  words  of  the 
first  edition  :  but  the  Rigveda^  as  is  proved  by  my 
reference  at  p.  315,  evinces  that  some  one  has  herein 
erred.  The  scholiast,  or  his  copyists,  should  have 
written  Nrishad. 

At  p.  43,  notes,  1.  7  ah  infra.,  I  have  replaced 
''the  Kdtthalcas'"  by  '^  KdWiahja  f'  and,  at  p.  272, 
notes,  1.  2  ah  infra.,  '■^  Sat  i/ ay  ana,''''  by  "the  S'dt'i/d- 
yana  BrdhmaiiaJ^  At  p.  139,  1.  3  ah  infra,  S'atakratu 
has  been  discarded  in  favour  of  Sukratu.  Compare 
Yol.  lY.,  p.  125,  1.  3 

Under  guidance  of  Sayaha  and  the  Sarvdnu/crama, 
grounds  have  offered  for  modifying  the  headings  of 
no  less  than  fifteen  hymns.  It  may  be  added,  that  it 
would  be  an  improvement,  in  the  headings  throughout, 
to  render  devatd — here  translated  "deity"  and  "di- 
vinity,"— by  "object  of  invocation."     See  pp.   100, 


POSTSCEIPT.  347 

323,  where  devatd  designates  the  sacrificial  post  and 
the  Kemedy  against  bad  dreams.  At  pp.  275^  277, 
I  have  harmonized  the  headings  with  the  "Index  to 
the  Siiktas,"  by  giving  to  the  simply  translettered 
"Viswadevas" — as  Professor  Wilson  writes  the  ex- 
pression,— the  preference  which  it  deserves  to  "  all  the 
gods." 

Thirty  or  forty  brief  references  have  been  incor- 
porated in  the  foot-notes,  for  the  purpose,  Avith  rare 
exceptions,  of  pointing  out  the  Translator's  own 
emendations,  or  additions,  especially  in  Yols.  11. ,  III., 
and  IV. 

In  several  instances,  it  seemed  advisable  to  indicate, 
by  an  explanatory  "  i.  ^.,"  fragments  of  elucidation 
quoted  from  Sayaiia.  But  for  some  such  indication, 
it  might  be  supposed, — as  in  pp.  184,  190, — that 
phrases  extracted  from  the  commentary  were  taken 
from  the  Rigveda  itself. 

The  statement  at  the  end  of  note  a,  p.  328,  has  not 
been  verified,  and,  probably,  arose  from  misrecollection. 

Three  passages  which  I  have  slightly  altered — 
the  second,  with  warrant  from  the  Translator's  manu- 
script,—  are  reproduced  below,  in  the  form  in  which 
they  are  presented  in  the  first  edition : 

"We  thus  find  that  most,  if  not  all,  the  deities  to 
whom  the  hymns  of  the  Rich,  as  far  as  those  of  the 
first  Ashtaka,  extend,  are  resolvable  into  three,"  &c. — 
Introduction,  p.  xxxix.,  1.  8. 

"Who  is  so  brilliant  as  S'anyu,  who  gratifies  like 
gold,  the  best  of  the  gods,  the  provider  of  habita- 
tions?"—P.  118,  1.  4. 


348  POSTSCRIPT. 

''The  red  and  black  coursers,  long-limbed,  well- 
caparisoned,  and  celestial,  and  harnessed,  well-pleased, 
to  the  yoke  of  the  chariot  in  which  the  showerer  of 
benefits  is  conveyed,  for  the  enrichment  of  Ri.jrasava, 
and  is  recognized  amongst  human  hosts." — P.  259, 1,  5. 

